27/8/1983- ||special articles||4372457||Meeting Basic Needs through Micro-Planning: Central Role of Essential Forestry||This paper argues that, while centralised planning has a great deal to its credit, some of the basic necessities of rural life, such as firewood, water dietary micro-nutrients, and better purchasing power, remain unfulfilled. An integrated conceptual approach to micro-planning and to essential forestry, to meet these needs, is therefore called for. Part I of the paper, which appeared last week, underscored the role of planning at the micro-level, and took stock of the basic needs of the people and the materials and resources needed to fulfil these needs. It also specified the tree species for inclusion in essential forestry. Section V and VI of this concluding Part II, appearing this week, describe the agricultural and supportive animal systems, respectively, required by the micro-planning envisaged. Section VII covers the necessary energy resources, and Section VIII the income supplementation that may be necessary. The last, Section IX summarises certain conclusions.||Vinod K. Huria,K. T. Achaya
05/11/1983-12/11/1983||special articles||4372677||Forestry in British and Post-British India: A Historical Analysis||The current debate on the draft Forest Act has necessitated an examination of forest policies in India. This article, while analysing colonial and post-colonial forest policies, concentrates on the historical process whereby the traditionally-held rights of the forest communities have been progressively curtailed through the development of forest policy, management and legislation. While the social imperatives behind forest policy have differed in the two periods under review - being the strategic interests of British imperialism before 1947 and after that the needs of the mercantile and industrial bourgeoisie - the impact on forest dwellers and their life-support systems has been a uniform one. The post-colonial state has taken over and further strengthened the organising principles of colonial forest administration - the assertion of state monopoly right and exclusion of forest communities. Section I of the paper deals with forestry in British India and Section II the post-colonial situation. Section III discusses the evolution of forest legislation. In Section IV are set out the author's conclusions. The paper is being published in two parts. Sections I and II were published last week, while the last two sections appear below.||Ramachandra Guha
16/7/1983- ||special article||4372315||Plantation Economy and Land Tenure System in Brahmaputra Valley, 1839-1914||The Brahmaputra Valley of Assam during the mid-nineteenth century offers one of the most instructive case studies of the development of plantations in an environment dominated by a subsistence agrarian economy. This paper endeavours to study the specific enclave features of the economy of the Brahmaputra valley arising out of the coexistence of these two sectors of differing nature - the traditional and the modern. It examines the system of land administration, the nature of land use before and after the inception of plantations, and the impact of this unequal ralationship on the regional agrarian economy and society.||Keya Dasgupta
04/6/1983- ||special articles||4372185||Iruvelpattu Revisited: I||This paper presents the findings of a resurvey of Iruvelpattu, a village in the South Acrot district of Tamilnadu. It is one of the 'South Indian Villages' surveyed originally by Gilbert Slater and his students in 1916, with this village being the initial one surveyed by Slater personally. Two further resurveys took place in 1937 and in 1961. The main themes of the resurvey are change and continuity in the last 65 years in living conditions, technology, landownership and the village power structure as can be pieced together from the earlier evidence and the present investigation. The paper is published in two parts. In the first part, we deal with demographic factors, education, health and water supply. We move on then to the village economy and discuss costs and returns in paddy cultivation based on pumpset irrigation and the new technology, a feature of the 1960s and 1970s.||S. Guhan,Joan P. Mencher
05/11/1983-12/11/1983||special articles||4372676||Linking Irrigation with Development: The Kerala Experience||Disproportionately high investment in irrigation in Kerala has nevertheless been marked by long time overruns in completion of projects and a far lower area than that targetted being brought under irrigation. The bulk of the investment, moreover, is for major-medium projects, and is intended for paddy lands. This paper aims in Section I to consider to what extent irrigation has succeeded in increasing and stabilising paddy yields; and in Section II to explore the possible reasons hindering proper use of irrigation water in paddy cultivation.||D. Narayana,K. Narayanan Nair
1/5/1983- ||land, labour and capital||4372125||Labour Productivity in Indian Agriculture||The results of regression exercises for various subsets of districts classified according to growth of output tend to confirm the hypothesis that labour productivity in agriculture is determined by the use of capital inputs on the one hand and output-augmenting modern biological inputs on the other. Since high growth districts are the predominant users of available tractors and tubewells (and other inputs) in the country, capital intensity per worker is the main determinant of labour productivity in these districts. Fixed capital alone is important, but the addition of variables like gross cropped area and fertilisers results in significant increase in the explanation of variation in labour productivity. This neat relationship, however, gets watered down for the medium, low and to some extent negative growth districts. In traditional agriculture, investment in modern equipment like tractors and tubewells is quite limited and even the working capital requirements are quite low. In these conditions labour productivity depends more on fluctuating output determined by vagaries of monsoons than on quantum of fixed and variable capital.||G. S. Bhalla,Y. K. Alagh
26/3/1983- ||review of agriculture, march 1983||4372005||Determinants of Fertiliser Use in Indian Agriculture||This paper develops a framework for the analysis of factors affecting fertiliser use in Indian Agriculture. Existing studies are unable to explain the deceleration in fertiliser use and the growing divergence between targets and actual levels of consumption. The paper then tries to explain the variations in fertiliser use [over regions and over time] in terms of a set of physical/technological factors and of relative price, using regression and correlation analysis. It suggests that irrigation is uniformly a dominant influence - especially groundwater. Spread of HYVs and fertiliser-intensive crops (notably those under irrigated area) are found to have a positive effect on fertiliser consumption. Use of fertilisers and relative price, as expected, are inversely related, but the relation is very weak. While most of the observed increase in fertiliser consumption over time can be 'explained' by these variables, they do not help understand why fertiliser consumption has decelerated. The deceleration has happened despite rapid growth of irrigation facilities and qualitative improvement in water supply (due to a phenomenal growth of energised wells and a rise in share of groundwater) and spread of HYVs. Hence a set of hypotheses are outlined, based on our theoretical analysis of the problem. An enquiry into these hypotheses perhaps would prove fruitful.||R. Nagaraj
1/5/1983- ||nutrition, poverty and population||4372130||Impact of Social and Economic Development on Mortality: Comparative Study of Kerala and West Bengal||Kerala's mortality level has been lower than West Bengal's at least since the early 20th century. The difference became sharper in the 1970s. Environmental and hygienic conditions are more favourable in Kerala, but the difference does not seem to be great enough to explain a significant part of the mortality differential. The empirical evidence from various surveys shows that the differences between the states in nutritional standard, per capita income, distribution of income and assets, industrialisation and urbanisation, cannot explain the lower mortality level in Kerala. The wider distribution of health facilities in the rural areas of Kerala and their greater utilisation are found to be significant factors. Two important reasons why the health facilities are used more in Kerala have been identified. First, the proportion of literates, particularly among females, is much higher in Kerala. Historically there has always been greater emphasis in Kerala on education and public health. Secondly, the rural poor in Kerala are more aware of their rights to use health and other public facilities than those in West Bengal. The differential awareness can be traced to the historical difference in the social and political movements in the two states. In general, West Bengal has always been characterised by a higher level of economic development and Kerala by a higher level of social development. The lower mortality level in Kerala can be attributed mostly to its higher social development and partly to its favourable environmental and hygienic conditions.||Moni Nag
01/1/1983-08/1/1983||special article||4371732||Women's Drudgery in Firewood Collection||While it is a commonplace that women in rural areas work just as hard as men do (if not harder), much of their work in maintenance tasks of the family, such as collecting fuel and water, cooking, looking after children, goes by unnoticed and unappreciated. A quick field investigation conducted in Gujarat revealed that a substantial portion of women's working time and energy is devoted to such tasks. Among the poorer households, difficulties in collecting firewood and fuel are on the increase, increasing women's drudgery. People seem to be caught between a process of immiserisation caused by increasing pressure on scarce resources (and their poor command of the resources to begin with), on the one hand, and the process of development which has led to valuable alternative uses for resources so far considered waste (and available to them free of cost), on the other. Thus, the increasing drudgery of rural women is an inseparable part of their overall deepening poverty in the rural areas.||D. Nagbrahmam,Shreekant Sambrani
15/1/1983- ||special articles||4371753||Agricultural Growth in China and India: Role of Price and Non-Price Factors||The increase in agricultural production achieved in China in the 1950s was based largely on the restoration and fuller utilisation of the traditional infrastructure of irrigation located largely, in the south. With the relatively high yield levels already achieved during this period and the very limited scope for extension of cultivated area, the only way of maintaining adequate rates of growth and correcting the regional imbalances was through large-scale investment for increasing further the area under irrigation (particularly in the north). Apart from the ideological considerations generally mentioned, a major reason for the far-reaching organisational changes introduceed from the early 1960s through the commune system was, therefore, essentially to mobilise rural labour on the necessary scale for undertaking such investment and for other related activities. The resumption of high rates of growth in agricultural production in China from 1970 can in fact be attributed to the substantial infrastructure that was built up in the course of the 1960s through investment in water and soil conservation (as well as in chemical fertilisers) The role of prices was, however, underrated and even neglected during this period. Apart from the possible failure to raise foodgrain and other prices selectively and by slow stages, there was clearly a strong tendency to assume that the opportunity cost of peasant labour was equal to or very close to zero. This in all probability is the main explanation for the changes in agrarian policy, in regard to both organisation and prices, that have been taking place in recent years in China. But the large-scale investment activity in agriculture which the organisational innovations made possible was an important and even indispensable phase in its development. Prices and other material incentives can evoke substantial increases in output only after the other constraints have been effectively relaxed.||K. N. Raj
09/4/1983- ||special articles||4372068||'Measurement of Undernutrition': Biological Considerations||This paper argues that (a) in the assessment of adequacy of calorie intakes in a community, it will be justifiable and prudent for us to continue to use the recommended mean calorie requirement and not the M-2 SD as the yardstick of calorie adequacy; and (b) it will be prudent not to place sole reliance on calorie intake figures for measurement of undernutrition but to continue to use the approaches hitherto in vogue for the assessment of nutritional status of individuals and population groups - namely, a combination of diet surveys, anthropometric measurements, clinical assessments, socio-economic and environmental status assessments and selective biochemical estimations - especially estimations of haemoglobin levels. There is indeed a need for developing a composite yardstick for the estimation of undernutrition taking all these factors into consideration.||C. Gopalan
11/6/1983- ||special articles||4372209||Iruvelpattu Revisited: II||This paper presents the findings of a resurvey of Iruvelpattu, a village in the South Arcot district of Tamilnadu. It is one of the 'South Indian Villages' surveyed originally by Gilbert Slater and his students in 1916, with this village being the initial one surveyed by Slater personally. The main themes of the resurvey are change and continuity in the last 65 years in living conditions, technology, landownership and the village power structure as can be pieced together from the earlier evidence and the present investigation. The paper is published in two parts. In the first part, the authors deal with demographic factors, education, health and water supply. They move on then to the village economy and discuss costs and returns in paddy cultivation based on pumpset irrigation and the new technology, a feature on the 1960s and 1970s.||S. Guhan,Joan P. Mencher
29/10/1983- ||special articles||4372653||Forestry in British and Post-British India: A Historical Analysis||The current debate on the draft Forest Act has necessitated an examination of forest policies in India. This article, while analysing colonial and post-colonial forest policies, concentrates on the historical process whereby the traditionally-held rights of the forest communities have been progressively curtailed through the development of forest policy, management and legislation. While the social imperatives behind forest policy have differed in the two periods under review - being the strategic interests of British imperialism before 1947 and after that the needs of the merchantile and industrial bourgeoisie - the impact on forest dwellers and their life-support systems has been a uniform one. The post-colonial state has taken over and further strengthened the organising principles of colonial forest administration - the assertion of state monopoly right and exclusion of forest communities. Section I of the paper deals with forestry in British India and Section II the post-colonial situation. Section III discusses the evolution of forest legislation. In Section IV are set out the author's conclusions. The paper is published in two parts. Sections I and II appear below, while the last two sections will be published next week.||Ramachandra Guha
20/8/1983- ||special article||4372432||Meeting Basic Needs through Micro-Planning: Central Role of Essential Forestry||This paper argues that, while centralised planning has a great deal to its credit, some of the basic necessities of rural life, such as firewood, water, dietary micro-nutrients, and better purchasing power, remain unfulfilled. An integrated conceptual approach to micro-planning to meet these needs is, therefore, presented in this paper. Central to such planning is the concept of essential forestry, designed to furnish fuel, timber, fruits, fodder, and manure, and to serve as a pivotal point to open up ways of meeting other basic human requirements. This paper will appear in two parts. Part I, appearing this week, comprises four sections. Section I underscores the role of planning, at the micro-level, from below. Section II takes stock of the basic needs of people and describes the materials necessary to fulfil these needs. Section III enumerates the resource endowments that can make available these materials. Section IV specifies the tree species that must be included in essential forestry to meet the various needs. Sections V and VI which are part of Part II, to follow, describe the agricultural system and the supportive animal system, respectively, required by the micro-planning envisaged. Section VII covers necessary energy resources, and Section VIII the income supplementation that may be necessary. The last Section IX summarises certain conclusions.||Vinod K. Huria,K. T. Achaya
24/9/1983- ||review of agriculture, september 1983||4372531||Impact of Irrigation on Instability in Farm Output: A Case Study of Tamil Nadu State||This paper investigates whether irrigation mitigates instability in agricultural production through a case study of Tamil Nadu. It tries to bring out that inter-period comparison in output instability - especially of the periods pertaining to the pre-HYV and the post-HYV phases of Indian agricultural history - is not as sure a guide to assessing the stabilisation role of irrigation as is contemporaneous comparison between irrigated output and rainfed output fluctuations during a given period. The paper concludes that during drought farmers in the state follow a strategy of protecting crop yield at the expense of shrinkage in irrigated acreage, especially of crops needing summer irrigation. On the other hand, in years of above normal rainfall, farmers are known to maximise production, utilising extra water availability, by expanding acreage under irrigation. This imparts considerable instability to irrigated farming in the state, a major part of which is traceable to area instability. However, further investigations are called for since the instability in irrigated farming is found to be no different from the one existing under dry farming.||B. D. Dhawan
05/2/1983- ||special articles||4371827||Towards a Social Forest Policy||The Forest Bill, yet to be enacted, has evoked a lot of controversy, though critics of the Bill are unnecessarily defensive and have been demanding only a modification of the provisions of the Bill. This paper considers the present forest policy from the point of view of the forest dwellers themselves whose interests have to be primary in any formulation of a new forest policy. It begins with a brief account of the historical evolution of the official forest policy in India and the various changes that have been brought about in forest policy since Independence. It considers and criticises the provisions of the Indian Forest Bill, 1980, and proposes detailed guidelines for a new forest policy. Such a policy, the author argues, should aim, first, at maintaining ecological and environmental balance, second, at meeting the basic needs of the forest dwellers by way of food, fuel and shelter and, finally, at meeting also the needs of forest-based industries as well those of the urban population.||Sharad Kulkarni
