1/7/1968- ||jati and varna||4358815||Changing Status of Pulaya Harijans of Kerala||The Pulayas are the bottom rung of the caste hierarchy in Kerala. From being a source of pollution, they have, through education, greater economic independence, and through enactment of laws prohibiting discrimination against them, attained a higher status in society. This higher status is evidenced by changes in behaviour patterns, modes of address, common eating and drinking - and even some cases of intermarriage with higher castes; in other words, by the near-disappearance of untouchability. In the interaction between well-to-do Pulayas and the higher castes, the change is, in fact, substantial. The inference is that untouchability is not an insurmountable barrier but the untouchables have to change their behavioural pattern and standard of living and achieve economic independence in their quest for social mobility. [This paper is based on a sample study of 450 Pulayas which the author conducted in three talukas of the former Travancore State between December 1963 and May 1964. The sample was selected from the lists of voters for village panchayat elections held in 1963.]||K. C. Alexander
05/10/1968- ||special articles||4359140||Shades of Darkness: The Annals of the Coal Industry||Technology and the consumer have been the twin victims of the interia of the coal mine-owners. As early as 1918, a British mining engineer had emphasised the urgent need of sand-stowing and the use of slack for generation of cheap power. These suggestions were effectively sabotaged, thus sanctifying the pursuit of quick and easy profits at the expense of safety and the consumer. When in 1925 there was a change from sellers' to buyers' market, the owners decided at last to bring out only what could be sold. The rest was left underground in such a state that it was not only irrecoverable at any subsequent date but was soon to provide the tinder for those eternal fires that to this day are the sightseers' delight in the Bengal-Bihar coalfields and public memorials to the rapacity of coal owners. Said the Burrows Committee in 1936: "the coal trade in India has been rather like a race in which profit has always come in first with safety a poor second, sound methods an also ran and national welfare a dead horse, entered perhaps, but never likely to start..." The Coal Mines Safety (Stowing) Act of 1939 accepted the pernicious principle of subsidising. Beginning with stowing, the principle was later extended to gas, depth, inclination, water, seam-thickness, and even transport costs from pithead to railhead. The Bhoothalingam Committee went further. Its cost-plus formula became the excuse for frequent price increases. In 1962, Government was hypnotised into believing that widening of price differentials between various grades would promote greater fuel efficiency among users. Why a similar logic could not apply to the coal industry itself was overlooked. The report of the Tariff Commission is unique for its elevation of fiction to the status of facts. The Commission's faith in the alleged urge of the industry to mechanise is misplaced. Mechanisation in Indian mines is the result of withdrawal of women workers. The so-called mechanisation far from "reducing occupational hazards of labour underground and the number of men facing these hazards" has become the most potent means for mass death, because of the crowding of green labour at the most dangerous places. India needs cheap thermal power and, therefore, cheap coal. This basic proposition is quite independent of wage increases and so-called difficult mining conditions.||K. V. Subrahmanyam
23/11/1968- ||special articles||4359351||The State of Industrial Relations: Recommendations by the National Commission's Study Groups||Some of the most complex and controversial issues on which the National Commission on Labour will have to give policy guidelines belong to the field of industrial relations. Present conditions in this field are grave, and 1966 and 1967 saw a sharp intensification of industrial conflict - not wholly attributable to the changed political climate after the last general elections. The study groups set up by the Commission have provided it with a realistic analyses of the problems involved as well as bold, practical suggestions for dealing with the problems. There is also a significant concurrence of views among the four regional study groups. Their conclusions and recommendations on important issues, however, run counter to the official policy of the past two decades. It will call for a great deal of courage and conviction on the part of the Commission to recommend a virtual reversal of past policy, especially since that policy has become a vested interest for some.||Bagaram Tulpule
26/10/1968- ||review of agriculture, october 1968||4359233||HYVP for Rice: Performance in a Bengal District||This paper examines the record of the High-Yielding Varieties Programme for rice in Birbhum district of West Bengal. One-fifth of the State target of area to be brought under the HYVP in kharif 1968-69 is in this district. The performance of the HYVP in this district is, therefore, important not only as an indicator of the prospects for the Programme, but also from the point of view of achieving the target of additional paddy production in the State. The achievement of the HYVP is assessed here in terms of the extent to which farmers have taken to the high-yielding varieties, as well as of the excess of physical yields and financial returns from these varieties over those from the traditional varieties. Experience with the HYVP in Birbhum emphasises the importance of irrigation. High fertiliser consuming seeds, like the high-yielding varieties, require not just enough irrigation but also controlled irrigation which, in the absence of arrangements for preserving water in the village, cannot be provided by irrigation facilities which themselves depend on the monsoon. Non-availability of irrigation water also effectively neutralises one of the major advantages of the high-yielding varieties of seeds - the fact of their being quick-maturing - by limiting the scope for growing a second crop. The tenancy pattern, characterised by wide prevalence of share-cropping, is another material factor which affects the performance of the HYVP in Birbhum. Paradoxically, improved technology calling for large out-of-pocket investment, which has invariably to be financed by the owner, strengthens the position of the owner and enables him to turn the terms of tenancy against the farmer with the inevitable disincentive effects on the latter.||S. Sengupta,M. G. Ghosh
22/6/1968- ||special articles||4358778||Forest Policy and Management||There now exist many scientific techniques for long-term planning of development and exploitation of forests. But little use has been made of them in this country mainly for want of reliable data about our forest wealth. Forest statistics are hopelessly inadequate and their collection too sporadic and irregular to be of much help in decision-making. Decisions about the type of trees to be developed, the rotational and situational practices to be followed, etc, demand extreme caution since hardwood plants take about 50 years to mature. In fact, these decisions are very often taken on the basis of the whims of a particular Conservator of Forests. The results of lack of statistical data and a scientific attitude to forest management are aggravated by the existing administrative structure which concentrates all authority in the Conservators of Forests leaving little room for specialist advice and direction.||P. P. Madappa
26/10/1968- ||review of agriculture, october 1968||4359232||New Agricultural Strategy Revisited||The New Agricultural Strategy is based on concentration of high-yielding varieties of seeds and complementary inputs on selected water-assured areas. The decision to concentrate resources marked a major departure from earlier agricultural policies. This strategy has been questioned by B S Minhas and T N Srinivasan. Using data from the 1964-65 all-India co-ordinated wheat yield trial they demonstrated in 1966 that fertilisers should not be concentrated on high-yielding varieties but should be spread to both the local and the new varieties. Marginal responses of the high-yielding varieties at economically optimal dosages of fertilisers were, they showed, below the marginal responses of local varieties at initial dosages. Minhas and Srinivasan based their policy conclusions on the data then available; these conclusions need to be re-examined now in the light of new data. This paper presents the results of the 1966-67 co-ordinated agronomy trials testing high-yielding varieties of wheats at several locations all over the country. The conclusions that emerge are: (a) the high dosages of chemical nutrients recommended for the new varieties of wheat are justified; and, (b) the allocation of fertilisers among new and old varieties indicated in the official strategy is optimal for maximum output. [The authors wish to thank Donald Erlenkotter and W David Hopper for making suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. Although their assistance is gratefully acknowledged, final responsibility, including for errors, is the authors'.]||Ralph W. Cummings,,Robert W. Herdt,S. K. Ray
01/6/1968- ||special articles||4358695||Irrigation Rates in Orissa: How Commercial Should They Be?||There is a tendency on the part of the States to manage irrigation works on commercial lines. The objective generally being to make the irrigation works pay at least for their working expenses and debt charges. An increase in water rates is often suggested as a method of improving the financial position of the irrigation works. Although there is some weight in the argument, it suffers from certain limitations. It prescribes rates only on the basis of working expenses and debt charges, and puts too much emphasis on costs to the neglect of the degree of benefit conferred by the irrigation system. States with older irrigation systems constructed at lower cost and with well-developed agriculture would be more suitable for the application of the principle than States with new irrigation works with their higher costs. In Orissa, for instance, most of the irrigation works are of recent origin. They are not supported by a well-developed agriculture in the State. In the circumstances, if water rates are fixed high enough to cover the cost of water supply, cultivators would be discouraged from utilising the irrigation facilities. With its predominant agricultural sector, which is frequently affected by large-scale drought, the extension of irrigation facilities in the State is a basic requirement of agricultural development. Even if irrigation projects do not yield sufficient revenue to cover their working expenses and debt charges, therefore, their development as a social overhead is an imperative.||Srish Chandra Patnaik
1/7/1968- ||politics, society and man||4358817||Electoral Politics and Social Change||This paper examines popular electoral politics as an integrating factor within the political system and as an agent of social change at the three main levels of the village, the State and the nation. The introduction of elective politics in the village has inspired new methods of attacking and defending privilege and status. The composition of the two parallel hierarchies, traditional and elected, may for a time appear similar but they are based on conflicting principles. Conflict may well increase, but through it come mobility and new alignments. Castes other than the dominant caste are beginning to be aware of themselves as corporate political entities and will negotiate as groups to see what they can obtain through their votes. Caste consciousness may thus seem to be strengthened but, simultaneously, relationships between castes are changed and the basis of caste hierarchy is weakened. The existence of factions indicates that the established leadership is not unchallenged and that political authority is not immovably lodged with one group. Factional divisions do not usually reflect competition between prosperous and under-privileged castes, but rather splits within the village elite. The rather contradictory ambitions to have elections in order that local government may be democratic but not to have contests for fear of breaking up the largely mythical solidarity of the village community provide a curious illustration of the conflicts in the ideology of Panchayati Raj. Corrupt practices in panchayat elections represent political behaviour which is radically novel in the Indian village: they have a modernising effect because persons with traditionally higher status are compelled to give money and concessions and even to court pollution in order to secure votes from social inferiors. State elections bring into close relationship the styles and alignments of village politics and the new national forms of political behaviour. They have played a significant part in building up and expressing regional loyalties and have encouraged traditional social groups to mobilise themselves for political action on a broader, State-wise basis. From the voters' angle, the parliamentary contest is an appendage of the assembly contest. The successful parliamentary candidate gains his seat largely through the good offices of his party colleagues, the assembly candidates and local bosses. The assembly contest is between generally wealthy personalities and concerns local issues; the parliamentary contest is generally between parties and about national and international issues but it has an odd epiphenomenal quality because it is so dependent on the more local fight. Consequently, an MP is far more beholden to his party than the average MLA. As compared with the MLA, he is more free from local pressures but he is also more responsive to the party organisation and party discipline - which accounts for the practical absence of defections at the centre, and their high frequency in certain States.||Duncan B. Forrester
31/8/1968- ||review of management, august 1968||4359000||Organisational Planning: Some Comments||This paper analyses organisational tasks and discusses three approaches to organisations study, and develops an approach to planning organisation of work. The task of organising requires more than dividing the work into manageable units or laying down authority charts. It requires integration of a set of dynamic forces as well as reconciling the various demands of technology and social factors. The demands vary within the organisation from one operating level to another. There are three distinguishable functional levels in an organisation: first, direction, service and control, second, operating management and third, primary work group level. The nature of demands at all three levels are different and these differences may justify different organisational fit at each level. General principles of organisation applicable to the enterprise as a whole seem neither applicable nor justified. The effectiveness of the organisation depends upon the nature of the task to be done. It must be based on an analysis of the physical activity at the base of the organisational triangle. The tasks at the higher levels of the hierarchy must bear direct relation to the basic tasks at the level of the physical activity. It is suggested that organisational planning must begin with analysis of the tasks at the physical level and only by determining the suitable organisation at this level can other positions be determined. This is so because there must be a direct link between the task at the base of the triangle and those that lie higher up in the hierarchy. Another characteristic of the organisation has to do with the need for having an adaptive organisation which can cope with changes in the environment and those that are induced from within the system of the enterprise.||Ishwar Dayal
30/11/1968- ||special articles||4359388||Fertilisers and Hydrocarbons: Projections Upto 1980||These projections show that the basic choice is between the import of crude oil for refining and the import of ammonia. Contrary to general belief, the import of crude oil will not require more foreign exchange; in fact, on the basis of all reasonable expectations regarding the prices of hydrocarbons, it will be import-saving. If the fertiliser industry is to use naphtha rather than imported ammonia, the question arises of how much naphtha and other hydrocarbons we should produce. Unless there is reason to expect a sharp rise in world prices of petroleum products or fall in Indian production costs, 36 million tonnes of refining capacity in 1975 and 50 million tonnes in 1980 are the maxima we can aim at. There is a strong justification for taking these figures also as minimum targets.||Ashok V. Desai,Ramesh K. Bhatia
