Vol. 49, No. 52 (DECEMBER 27, 2014)||review of rural affairs||Groundwater Irrigation-Electricity-Crop Diversification Nexus in Punjab: Trends, Turning Points, and Policy Initiatives||ANINDITA SARKAR and ARJIT DAS||The present wheat-rice cropping pattern, groundwater irrigation, procurement policy, and electricity policy have bound farmers in Punjab into a convenient yet vicious relationship that is economically and ecologically unsustainable. The state government provides free electricity for agriculture and a high minimum support price and yet recommends a shift away from rice to curb groundwater depletion. This paper analyses the trends and turning points in irrigation development in the state, its shifts in cropping pattern, and trends in electricity consumption. It further examines the real-world feasibility of the long-pending recommendation to shift the cropping pattern from water-intensive rice and wheat to less water-intensive maize and wheat.
Vol. 49, No. 50 (DECEMBER 13, 2014)||commentary||Interlinking of Rivers: A Plea to the Government||RAMASWAMY R IYER||The basic ideas underlying the project to link up India's rivers, namely, the transfer of water from flood-prone areas to drought-prone ones, and from surplus to deficit basins, are completely fallacious. The project envisages upwards of 80 dams and associated reservoirs, each of which will have significant environmental, ecological, social and human impacts and consequences. It will virtually redraw the geography of India. Should we not study all these matters carefully before taking an irrevocable decision?
Vol. 49, No. 48 (NOVEMBER 29, 2014)||review of urban affairs||From Margins to Mainstream? State Climate Change Planning in India||NAVROZ K DUBASH and ANU JOGESH||In 2009, the Government of India requested states to develop State Action Plans on Climate Change. Based on a detailed analysis of five state climate plans, this article finds that climate plans provide an important institutional platform to mainstream concerns of environmental sustainability into development planning but fail to update ideas of sustainability to include climate resilience. There are shortcomings in approach, process, formulation of outcomes, and implementation efforts. These shortcomings are united by a common thread – a tendency to prematurely view state climate plans as vehicles for generating implementable actions rather than an opportunity to redirect development towards climate resilience. However, if state plans are viewed as the beginning of a complex process of updating sustainable development planning rather than as an end in themselves, they provide a foundation upon which climate concerns can be more effectively mainstreamed in local development planning.
Vol. 49, No. 45 (NOVEMBER 8, 2014)||special article||Health, Illness and Disease: A Political Ecology Perspective||BIKRAMADITYA KUMAR CHOUDHARY||The conceptions of disease and its formulation under different paradigms have made it clear that the approach towards health and medicine has never been completely detached from ecology. Health and disease are thought to be the products of the interaction among three key elements: the agent, the host, and the environment. This paper is an attempt to develop an approach that encompasses the concerns surrounding an understanding of disease ecology and a patient's behaviour during treatment. Using the example of tuberculosis patients put under DOTS, which disregards the patient's say in decision-making, it analyses the implications for the larger health issue using the political ecology approach.
Vol. 49, No. 39 (SEPTEMBER 27, 2014)||commentary||A Hundred Days Closer to Ecological and Social Suicide||ASHISH KOTHARI||The first 100 days of the Narendra Modi government which have been celebrated by the mainstream media saw what can only be called a widespread and large-scale assault on rules, laws and institutions meant to protect the environment, and more is on the cards. Side by side, the central as also state governments of various hues have moved against non-governmental organisations raising social and environmental issues. But resistance to corporate-driven growth continues and alternatives continue to be explored.
Vol. 49, No. 39 (SEPTEMBER 27, 2014)||special article||Spatial Variation in the 'Muslim Vote' in Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh, 2014||RAPHAEL SUSEWIND and RAHEEL DHATTIWALA||In this paper, we propose to reconcile the controversial debate on Muslim "vote banks" in India by shifting the spatial focus from statewide assessments to the level of constituencies. With the example of Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh in the 2014 general elections, and using an innovative booth-level ecological inference model, we show that Muslims might indeed vote en bloc for or against certain parties, but they tend to do so in a much more localised way than previously assumed. While public Muslim support for the Bharatiya Janata Party did not translate into electoral support in most places, there are important exceptions to this trend – and at least in the case of Uttar Pradesh, their support for competing parties followed a fairly complex spatial pattern. We further explore this spatial variation in Muslim vote pattern by looking at the moderating impact of minority concentration, violent communal history, and ethnic coordination and conclude with a call for more disaggregated research.
Vol. 49, No. 38 (SEPTEMBER 20, 2014)||commentary||Sidestepping Science: India's 'Notional' Board for Wildlife||NANDINI VELHO, MEGHNA KRISHNADAS, UMESH SRINIVASAN and SACHIN SRIDHARA||The Narendra Modi government's initial reconstitution of the National Board for Wildlife, which the Supreme Court questioned as contravening the provisions of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, is in line with the current ethos of development at all costs. The decision to keep out domain experts in ecology suggests a refusal to acknowledge the complexities underlying conservation.
Vol. 49, No. 37 (SEPTEMBER 13, 2014)||notes||Lessons from Science: Need for a Rethink of Concepts in Economics||DODO J THAMPAPILLAI||The recognition of two important concepts in science, namely, the assimilative capacity of nature (resilience) and the entropy law of thermodynamics enables the formulation of an alternative framework for factor utilisation in economics. This framework, which explicitly includes environmental capital as a factor, enables the illustration of the entropy law being the driver of diminishing marginal returns and the limited ranges of substitutability between factors. Such revisions have profound implications for policy formulation. Stabilising environmental capital becomes an important instrument of policy at all levels.
Vol. 49, No. 36 (SEPTEMBER 6, 2014)||special article||The Conservation Question: Inspired by the Kāṇi Tribes of Southern Western Ghats||P MADHU, HARSHA OOMMEN and SHYNU V C||In this paper the idea of conservation is revisited through capturing the erstwhile pre-capitalist lifeworld of the Kāṇis of Shenduruney and Agastiya Malai regions of the southern Western Ghats within Kerala. The essence of conservation is traced through ecosophical meditations of Uexküll, Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, Deleuze and Guattari. We open up the thinking on conservation towards enhancement of ecology and propose minority politics which may de-singularise the ego-logical schizophrenia towards re-territorialisation of the eco-logical assemblage of human incorporeality.
Vol. 49, No. 35 (AUGUST 30, 2014)||special article||Measuring Well-being and Accounting Prices of Environmental Resources||M N MURTY||Along the non-optimal sustainable developmental paths of the economy, the choice between benefitbased or cost-based accounting prices for measuring wealth assumes importance from the point of empirical feasibility and tractability. In the context of depletion of environmental resource stocks in the development process, compensatory afforestation of one hectare of forestland or reduction of a tonne of particulate matter emission at margin could be regarded as marginal investment projects. The account price of the resource could be either the present value of costs or the present value of benefits of this marginal investment project. The presence of irreversibility in resource use could be a problem in using cost-based accounting prices. Therefore, an empirically feasible method of measuring wealth of a nation could be to use the cost-based accounting price in general and the benefit-based measure in the special cases where irreversibility is present.
Vol. 49, No. 31 (AUGUST 2, 2014)||discussion||Fresh Thinking Needed||MUKUL SANWAL||The promise of inclusive and sustainable development can only be achieved if key policy decisions are rethought with clear priorities – on urbanisation and economic growth – with the transformations kept within ecological limits. A discussion on Ramaswamy R Iyer's article "Environment and Development: Some Thoughts for the New Government" (EPW, 21 June 2014).
Vol. 49, No. 29 (JULY 19, 2014)||notes||Western Ghats Conservation: Experts' Reports and a View from the Ground||P J DILIP KUMAR||While no one can disagree with the Gadgil Committee on the Western Ghats that we need to "develop sustainably – conserve thoughtfully", we must disagree with them that the strategy adopted so far has been to "conserve thoughtlessly", at least as far as the forests and wildlife are concerned. We need not fear that the Western Ghats will vanish if the expert panel recommendations are not accepted in toto: the forest area is still in safe hands, and the people's organisations (the village forest committees) are fully aware of the importance of conservation to their own survival and for serving global interests. The government has to set up workable arrangements that have the acquiescence of the population at large, so they need not feel rattled by the hard stance adopted by the environmentalists in public.
Vol. 49, No. 26/27 (JUNE 28-JULY 5, 2014)||commentary||Is There a Case for an Environmental Regulator?||SHIBANI GHOSH||One stated agenda of the new government is a commitment to addressing business concerns by smoothening the path to environmental clearances for projects and lowering transaction costs. The Supreme Court had earlier directed the central government to set up an environmental regulator at the state and at the centre. But do national and state regulators provide an effective alternative to the current institutional structure?
Vol. 49, No. 25 (JUNE 21, 2014)||commentary||Environment and Development: Some Thoughts for the New Government||RAMASWAMY R IYER||There are some worrying signals from the new government in New Delhi that it could compromise on environmental concerns in the pursuit of more rapid growth: clearances could be given quickly (i e, environment protection requirements will be loosened), the Land Acquisition Act could be diluted and more. It may be more useful if we shake ourselves free of the obsession with GDP growth rates and try instead to make India a caring, humane, compassionate, equitable, just and harmonious society.
Vol. 49, No. 21 (MAY 24, 2014)||special article||Small Hydropower Development in Himachal Pradesh: An Analysis of Socioecological Effects||J MARK BAKER||This article tries to understand Himachal Pradesh's experience with promoting privatised small hydropower development. Based on field research conducted in 2012 on all completed small hydropower projects in the state, it examines the implementation of Himachal Pradesh's small hydropower policy and highlights the local social and environmental impacts of small hydropower development. The vast majority of small hydropower projects have generated unmitigated negative effects; employment generation, while significant, is mostly temporary, and uncompensated deaths from construction-related accidents are especially worrying. Insights from this study provide the basis for proposing concrete steps that together could help small run-of-the-river hydropower projects realise their purported, but not realised, benefits.
Vol. 49, No. 18 (MAY 3, 2014)||perspectives||Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel: A Play in Five Acts||MADHAV GADGIL||The Western Ghats Ecology Expert Panel report advocates replacing the current pattern of exclusionary development and conservation by an inclusive regime, respecting the existing, but currently sabotaged, constitutional and legal provisions for environmental protection and democratic devolution of the decision-making process. The report's objective assessment of the prevailing situation and the recommendations that it should be taken to all the gram sabhas, and appropriate regulatory and promotional measures decided through a bottom-up democratic process were unacceptable to those currently benefiting from the perpetuation of an economy of violence. They attempted to first suppress and then subvert the report. There are, however, hopeful signs that the report's message is getting across to the people.
Vol. 49, No. 17 (APRIL 26, 2014)||review of women's studies||Struggling against Gendered Precarity in Kathikudam, Kerala||PARVATHY BINOY||Drawing on the struggles of the Nitta Gelatin India Limited Action Council at Kathikudam in Kerala, this article critically expands on Guy Standing's notion of the global precariat. Using feminist work on the politics of waste, it argues that gendered precariousness is produced through human-as-waste conditions besides underscoring the importance of understanding it as a lived and felt process of precarity-in-the-making. This process not only shapes gendered experiences of precariousness wrought by environmental degradation but also informs sociopolitical struggles against precariousness and for social memory and belonging. It argues that these spaces of political struggle often also produce gendered contradictions and specific gendered divisions of labour within their political praxis.
Vol. 49, No. 14 (APRIL 5, 2014)||odisha||Confronting Extractive Capital: Social and Environmental Movements in Odisha||KUNDAN KUMAR||Mines and other large industrial projects in Odisha have meant the large-scale displacement of people, and destruction of the environment. These have led to widespread grass-roots resistance. This paper takes a look at the major movements against dislocation and the state-corporate nexus that seeks to repress or counter them. It analyses who actually benefits from further depriving the poor, and the crony capitalism and capture of the state apparatus by the extractive sector. It also points out that an increasing convergence of the ecological and social justice trajectories is seen in the people's resistance movements.
Vol. 49, No. 11 (MARCH 15, 2014)||commentary||Conservation and Development in the Western Ghats: A Tale of Two Committees and More||KANCHAN CHOPRA||The Ministry of Environment and Forests by its hasty order of 20 December 2013 has set in motion events that go against the recommendations of the Western Ghats Ecology Experts Panel and the High Level Working Group. Decisions with respect to the Western Ghats – 39 sites within which now have the World Heritage tag and are the repository of unique biodiversity rich regions – will now go back into the hands of individual state governments, driven by their own short-term economic and electoral interests.
Vol. 49, No. 8 (FEBRUARY 22, 2014)||special article||Revolt and Reform in South Asia: Ghadar Movement to 9/11 and After||RADHA D'SOUZA||The Ghadar movement holds the clues to unravelling two paradoxes of modern India. First, India remains a constitutional democracy even when authoritarianism is embedded in the architecture of the state. The second paradox is that internationally India is a model for "democratic-development" even though the country has regressed into an abyss of poverty, dispossession, internal strife, ecological precariousness, rising fundamentalisms and militarism since Independence. The Ghadar centenary year is an opportune moment to reflect on the constitutive nature of the rebellion-repression-reform cycles that is formative of the Indian state and Constitution.
Vol. 49, No. 4 (JANUARY 25, 2014)||commentary||Historical Validity of Mullaperiyar Project||R SEENIVASAN||This historical analysis of the Periyar project questions the arguments and some of the contemporary claims made about the project's engineering and construction, and its environmental impact. Far from being an environmentally destructive project, this was a "pacifist" scheme when it was built. The article throws light on these issues by analysing historical documents.
Vol. 49, No. 4 (JANUARY 25, 2014)||special article||Why the Underdogs Came Out Ahead: An Analysis of the Supreme Court's Environmental Judgments, 1980-2010||GEETANJOY SAHU||A study of judgments by the Supreme Court in environmental cases from 1980 to 2010 shows that a majority of them have supported the issues raised by underdogs such as environmental NGOs against the practices or policies of the powerful such as governments and industrial units. But prominent exceptions to this have been the outcomes of cases challenging infrastructure projects. This paper seeks to explain how and why the Supreme Court has frequently decided in favour of weaker parties, and to analyse the implications of this for environmental jurisprudence in India.
