18/10/1986- ||special articles||4376236||The Unfinished Struggle of Santhal Bataidars in Purnea District, 1938-42||In recent years the countryside in Bihar has been convulsed by severe agrarian tensions arising to a large extent from the deliberate negligence on the part of the government of issues affecting the interests of oppressed sections, such as tenants-at-will and agricultural labourers. The persistence of the problems of these sections is an outcome of the failure of the Indian National Congress to effectively integrate agrarian issues with its programme for attaining Independence. This argument has been demonstrated here by examining in detail the struggle of the Santhal "bataidars" (sharecroppers who were tenants-at-will) against their maliks (comprising tenure-holders and occupancy tenants) in Dhamdaha revenue circle in the western part of Purnea district between 1938 and 1942. The conflict occurred in a political environment dominanted partly by the national movement and partly by the struggles of the upper layers of the tenantry against the zamindars in Bihar. The capacity of the Bihar Provincial Kisan Sabha and the Congress to take up the problems of tenants-at-will has been critically examined, and a point of view that endorses the latter's position giving primacy to the campaign against colonial rule, while postponing the solution of agrarian issues till the attainment of Independence, has been questioned. The conflict between the Santhal "bataidars" and their maliks has been examined in the context of the ecological setting in which the two groups came to be involved in a common scheme of production relations. It has been argued that the principal shortcoming of much of the work on agrarian struggles in Bihar during the period of British rule in the twentieth century is the failure to postulate a clear picture of agrarian differentiation based on the unique features of the pattern of production relations in the area of conflict. While emphasising the unique elements of class relations in Dhamdaha, including the capacity of the Santhal "bataidars" to pilot their own struggle, the limitations of regarding them as an autonomous group have been stressed.||Anand Chakravarti
22/2/1986- ||special articles||4375369||Urbanisation in India: Review and Prospects||Developing strategies for management of rapid urban growth constitutes a major challenge for development-planners and policy-makers. The strategies must satisfy two essential conditions. First, they must contribute to meeting the needs for gainful employment, housing, and essential services of the rapidly increasing urban population at acceptable economic and social cost. Second, they must ensure that urban growth contributes to national and regional economic growth, particularly through multiple, growth-inducing urban-rural interactions. The strategies will require advances in several directions, but principally in developing (a) a spatial pattern of urbanisation that is better adapted to the economic and social conditions of India than the one which has been allowed to develop during the last several decades; (b) lower-cost technologies of construction and of delivery of urban services; and (c) suitable political and administrative structures for management of large urban systems. This paper is divided into six parts. In part I, trends in the growth of the urban population during the 30-year period 1951-81 and the projections of the growth to the end of the century, contained in the World Development Report 1984, are reviewed. Part II discusses the strategies of dispersed industrial development and urbanisation which have formed the basis of official policies since the early 1960s. Part III discusses the issue of resources of finance and management for urban administration and for undertaking the needed programme of expansion of housing and urban services. The reasons for grossly inadequate resource-allocation during the last three decades and the prospect of more adequate resource inputs in future are discussed. Part IV and V are devoted to discussion of the problems of the maintenance of peace and security and of environmental pollution in the cities. The problems of the four giant cities-Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Delhi-are discussed very briefly in Part VI against the background of projections of increase in their populations by two or three times during the 20-year period, 1980-2000, made by the authors of the World Development Report 1984. The question is raised whether it will be possible to cope with the pressures created by such rapid growth on urban systems which are already so greatly over-strained.||V. Nath
21/6/1986-28/6/1986||special articles||4375830||Endemic Goitre: Why the Apathy? Review of National Goitre Control Programme||More than 120 million people in India are exposed to the risk of endemic goitre which has long been established as being a consequence of environmental iodine deficiency. Iodine prophylaxis through the widespread use of iodised salt is the accepted and financially feasible method of preventing and controlling endemic goitre. The National Goitre Control Programme (NGCP) is now two decades old. Yet, less than 15 per cent of the known endemic areas are being covered under the programme. Why has the NGCP failed? This article critically reviews the programme.||C. S. Pandav,N. Kochupillai,M. G. Karmarkar,L. M. Nath
30/8/1986- ||review of management, august 1986||4376068||New Information Technologies and Developing Countries: Implications for Human Resources Development||Private firms based in the major OECD countries are under increasing pressure to expand the worldwide proliferation of their technologies, penetrate or at least retain increasingly protected markets and spread the excessive cost burden of research and development. On the other hand, the process of transferring and disseminating technology, once started, is increasingly eroding the capacity of these very firms, including the most powerful multinational corporations, to control this technology, i e, to remain in a position of technological dominance. Viewed from a Third World perspective, this situation has important strategic implications. Both governments and companies from developing countries need to strive to understand these new constraints and contradictions inherent in the prevailing concepts of global technology management in order to exploit them for their own purposes. They need to utilise much more systematically the increasing reliance of US, Japanese and European companies on technology exports as a key variable for devising and implementing viable strategies of acquiring new information technologies. Policies of human resources development have a crucial role to play in this context. In fact, any attempt to apply new information technologies in developing countries to agriculture, industry or the exploration, exploitation and use of natural resources is bound to fail as long as there are insufficient capacities for monitoring, assessing, acquiring, maintaining, adapting and redesigning such technologies. In short, improving learning and innovative capacities, both for individuals and social groups, is a basic prerequisite for any strategy to subordinate informatics to the requirements of Third World societies.||Dieter Ernst
29/3/1986- ||special articles||4375486||Land Hunger and Deforestation: Case Study of Cardamom Hills in Kerala||The Cardamom Hills Reserve in the evergreen forests in the High Ranges of Kerala has been heavily denuded and put under crops unsuitable for the area. Not only has this resulted in a decline in soil fertility and productivity, but it has had a deleterious effect on cardamom cultivation as well. This paper reviews the social, economic and political processes which have operated in the region before and after Independence. Under British the policy followed by the government was compatible with the interests of the cardamom cultivators. Improvements in productivity could be achieved without disturbing the ecological balance. During the post-Independence period encroachment of forest land and the policy of regularising these encroachments has led to indiscriminate denudation.||P. Sivanandan,D. Narayana,K. Narayanan Nair
11/1/1986- ||special articles||4375204||External Economic Constraints and Domestic Economic Policy||This paper analyses the recent adverse changes in the international economic climate and the pressures on the Indian economy to adjust to these developments with a view to arriving at a judgment on the feasibility of an autonomous, non-dependent path of development in India. The paper begins with a brief reference to the 1985-86 Union Budget which helps to trace current official thinking on issues having a bearing on the external viability of the economy. The variables in the economy considered to be crucial in determining its international economic standing are next analysed to bring out the role of the international economy in regard to domestic development policy. In the concluding section of the paper, the underlying rationale of the policy options recently exercised by the government is spelt out and it is concluded that the rationale is far removed from the requirements of autonomous, non-dependent development.||Sunanda Sen
29/3/1986- ||review of agriculture, march 1986||4375479||Economies of Scale or Advantages of Class? Some Results from a South Indian Farm Economy Study||The controversy over 'farm size and productivity' which began more than two decades ago is continuing unabated. It has important implications for the debate on agricultural development. The following case study of agricultural production in Tiruchi district, Tamil Nadu, is intended in part as a contribution to this discussion. It is the authors' argument that the size-productivity framework may not be the most fruitful one for analysing the problem of agricultural productivity. Besides the fact that size is not necessarily the best measure of scale, their material brings out the point that scale may not always be relevant to the determination of productivity. The evidence that the authors examine suggests that intensity of cultivation and the class status of cultivating households may be more important in this regard. A methodological conclusion arising from the study is that since the ecological and historical specificities of a farm economy play an important role in the determination of productivity, it would be most hazardous to make generalisations regarding the size-productivity relationship.||Venkatesh B. Athreya,Gustav Böklin,Göran Djurfeldt,Staffan Lindberg
27/12/1986- ||review of agriculture, december 1986||4376500||Farmers' Organisation in Large Irrigation Projects||The paper advocates the necessity of farmers' organisation at the watercourse level in large irrigation projects in India. The utility of such an organisation is evidenced in the findings of the scholars all over the world. Despite various government pronouncements about the necessity of farmers' organisation, they are in a state of infancy in India. The relevant issues concerning farmers' organisation which are required to be resolved before such organisations are built in to the irrigation projects are as follows: 1) The Role of the Government/the Agency 2) Farmers' participation: before or after OFD Works 3) Single versus multi functions 4) One tier versus multi tier 5) Village based versus channel based 6) Lesions from indigenous systems. The paper outlines the factors contributing to the success of such an organisation. The factors deduced from a successful case of farmers' organisation studied by us earlier are: i) Good leadership; ii) Adequate and reliable water supply; iii) Greater interaction between the officials and the farmers; iv) Easy unanimity among group members; v) Inducement from the government/the agency; and vi) Legitimacy of the organisation.||Niranjan Pant
22/2/1986- ||review of management, february 1986||4375367||Development of Senior Administrators||Efforts for development of senior administrators have been either inadequate or ad hoc, lacking appreciation of key concerns including issues of need, objectives and content. In the meantime, the number of senior administrators in most developing countries needing intervention inputs for development has been steadily increasing with the growth in the pace of planned economic development. The environmental context of job performance by the senior administrator has also been changing along with sharp adjustments in the configuration of internal and external relationships in the growing maze of government departments. It is therefore necessary to appreciate the contemporary context as well in establishing the case for development of senior administrators, so that some prevailing concerns can be identified and pursued for implementation This paper seeks to isolate some challenges constituting the context, the range of needed intervention inputs and related issues as the underpinnings.||A. P. Saxena
26/7/1986- ||special articles||4375943||Social Forestry: Time to Modify Goals?||Should social forestry be seen necessarily as yet another big farmer perversion of a rural development effort intended to bring benefits to marginal farmers and the landless but in fact putting additional income into the pockets of the rural rich? Or, can a case be made that perhaps social forestry objectives should be modified somewhat and that with a changed set of goals there is ample scope for a flow of benefits to the rural poor? Such questions are especially pertinent at present, given the government's programme for massive afforestation of degraded lands and the release in October 1985 of a World Bank-sponsored study calling for a five-year, $ 500 million, fuelwood-agro-forestry effort in India. This paper addresses these issues, both at the national level and with special reference to Maharashtra, which has a major social forestry enterprise currently under way.||Harry W. Blair
11/1/1986- ||special articles||4375203||Environmental Conflicts and Public Interest Science||The emergence of public interest science is critical to a just resolution of conflicts over natural resources since, in its absence, partisan science is given the status of a neutral value-free, and independent tool for resolving conflicts. However, since partisan science is cognitively rooted in special vested interests, it tends to bias public policy decisions in their favour and against public interest. In support of this argument, the authors review the role of public interest science in environmental action in the Doon Valley and in the forest struggles.||Vandana Shiva,J. Bandyopadhyay
08/3/1986-15/3/1986||special articles||4375429||The Number Game: Occupational Health Hazards at Indian Rare Earths Plant||The Department of Atomic Energy is currently pushing forward its ambitious plan involving a ten-fold expansion of nuclear power generation by the year 2000. This would involve the setting up of a number of nuclear establishments and would expose a number of people, workers and neighbouring communities to varying degrees of excess radiation. The Indian Rare Earths is the only DAE venture which has completed 30 years of operation, which incidentally is the average latency for cancer which is just one of the health hazards of exposure to radiation. This paper reports a retrospective epidemiological study of workers at the Rare Earths Division of the Indian Rare Earths Limited, Alwaye in Kerala. The study examines the mortality profiles of workers for the last 15 years. Workers at the nearby Travancore Cochin Chemicals and those insured with the Employees State Insurance Corporation are taken as the control populations. The study demonstrates a significant difference in the incidence of cancer and mortality due to heart diseases and all causes between the IRE workers and the control populations. The incidence of sterility among the IRE workers and genetic disorders among their children also appear to be high. However, a study of this sort can only formulate a clinical hypothesis. There is an urgent need to institute a comprehensive, inter-disciplinary study of the plant and the workers. Such a study cannot unfortunately be conducted by independent workers or research centres because the Atomic Energy Act of 1962 prohibits any such inquiry into the affairs, including health and safety issues, of the DAE.||V. T. Padmanabhan
25/10/1986- ||special articles||4376271||The Unfinished Struggle of Santhal "Bataidars" in Purnea District, 1938-42||In recent years the countryside in Bihar has been convulsed by severe agrarian tensions arising to a large extent from the deliberate negligence on the part of the government of issues affecting the interests of oppressed sections, such as tenants-at-will and agricultural labourers. The persistence of the problems of these sections is an outcome of the failure of the Indian National Congress to effectively integrate agrarian issues with its programme for attaining Independence. This argument has been demonstrated here by examining in detail the struggle of the Santhal "bataidars" (sharecroppers who were tenants-at-will) against their maliks (comprising tenure-holders and occupancy tenants) in Dhamdaha revenue circle in the western part of Purnea district between 1938 and 1942. The conflict occurred in a political environment dominanted partly by the national movement and partly by the struggles of the upper layers of the tenantry against the zamindars in Bihar. The capacity of the Bihar Provincial Kisan Sabha and the Congress to take up the problems of tenants-at-will has been critically examined, and a point of view that endorses the latter's position giving primacy to the campaign against colonial rule, while postponing the solution of agrarian issues till the attainment of Independence, has been questioned. The conflict between the Santhal "bataidars" and their maliks has been examined in the context of the ecological setting in which the two groups came to be involved in a common scheme of production relations. It has been argued that the principal shortcoming of much of the work on agrarian struggles in Bihar during the period of British rule in the twentieth century is the failure to postulate a clear picture of agrarian differentiation based on the unique features of the pattern of production relations in the area of conflict. While emphasising the unique elements of class relations in Dhamdaha, including the capacity of the Santhal "bataidars" to pilot their own struggle, the limitations of regarding them as an autonomous group have been stressed. [This is the second and concluding part of this paper; the first part appeared last week.]||Anand Chakravarti
26/4/1986- ||special articles||4375605||Underutilisation Revisited: Surface Irrigation in Drought Prone Areas of Western Maharashtra||This paper examines irrigation potential and its utilisation in respect of the Mula irrigation system in Western Maharashtra. The empirical evidence gathered for the Mula project indicates concentration of a heavy-water-using crop like sugarcane in the head reaches of the canal. Correspondingly, the utilisation percentage is higher in the head reaches of the canal than in the tail reaches. This kind of development adversely affects the availability of water to the tail-enders. Another adverse impact of this type of irrigation development is waterlogging and soil salinity, mainly in the upper reaches of the canal. Official statistics of the Ahmednagar Irrigation Circle show that a significant proportion of the irrigable command area of the Mula project is not available for irrigation because of waterlogging, salinity and alkalinity. The findings of the study also suggest that the percentage of area irrigated to the potential created does not give a correct measure of the extent of utilisation of irrigation potential. The definition of irrigation potential created assumes that land development (levelling, construction of field channels, etc) below the outlet head is complete and that the 'chak' is ready to receive the irrigation water, whereas in actual practice this may not be the case. Second, as noticed in the Mula project, the cropping pattern that actually develops may be considerably different from that assumed while ascertaining the potential created. In view of these factors, the author suggests, it would be more meaningful to estimate the extent of utilisation by taking into account the water released compared to the planned release and the area actually irrigated.||Ashok K. Mitra
