1/2/1976- ||multinationals||4364370||Transnational Enterprise, Manufactured Exports and Employment in Less Developed Countries||There exist many potential sources of difficulty for the less developed countries in the new manufacturing for export. They include: (i) a substantial degree of control by transnational enterprises of marketing outlets for manufactured products in the industrialised countries - through brand names, market concentration at the wholesale and/or retail level, and other barriers to entry; (ii) highly imperfect markets for the relevant technologies, with Western technology owners facing ill-informed and competitive Third World purchasers: (iii) a large number of low-income countries all seeking to develop exports of a similar type, and therefore competing - with far less bargaining power than in the cases where they possess a scarce natural resource or the rights to domestic market access - against one another to sell their labour and other services to foreign firms; (iv) high tariff and non-tariff barriers against their manufactured exports in their major prospective markets, with the political pressure for their reduction or removal emanting only from the transnational enterprises to which the less developed countries sell; (v) the absence of international conventions or rules which might protect the less developed countries against discriminatory treatment, the GATT having formally authorised such treatment in the case of textiles and failed to adopt procedures to prevent future similar events; (vi) the frequent practice of transnational enterprises controlling the right to export on the part of subsidiaries or technology purchasers, in the absence of international laws or conventions prohibiting such restrictive practices; (vii) the weak administrative capacity and political power of the typical government in the less developed countries which renders difficult the process of effective bargaining, monitoring and control with respect to foreign agreements, and transnational enterprises. Whether these difficulties are enough to greatly reduce or even to absolutely cancel the potential gains from the "new international division of labour" will depend, in large part, upon the policies of governments both in developed and in less developed countries. In the absence of measures designed to forestall these outcomes, they seem likely at least to result in a highly unequal distribution of the gains from trade as between the less developed countries and the industrialised world and to create new dimensions of political and economic dependence.||G. K. Helleiner
30/10/1976- ||special articles||4365057||Air Pollution in Bombay: The Emissions Charge Approach||While all-round proportional cutbacks of emissions may superficially seem the most equitable way of sharing the pollution burden, such a system is certainly not efficient, nor is it as equitable as implementing the equimarginal principle through a charge. Under the latter system while low control cost polluters bear more of the abatement burden than high control cost polluters (resulting in efficiency) this is more than offset by the fact that they have to pay the charge on a relatively smaller amount of unabated emissions resulting in equity. Thus the burden of internalising social costs is borne by consumers in proportion to pollution generated, which should have the appropriate resource allocation effects. The income distribution implications will have to be investigated for each particular case. However, in view of its obvious theoretical and practical advantages this approach deserves consideration as a possible component of an air pollution control programme for Bombay. Parts of Bombay's air pollution problem may be amenable to the emissions charge approach.||P. B. Ghate
27/3/1976- ||special articles||4364493||In Defence of a National Drug Industry||The present state of the country's basic drugs industry, which has still to depend on imports for meeting 70 per cent of its requirements, is a sad commentary on the implementation of the recommendations of the Pharmaceutical Enquiry Committee, made in 1954. It is sadder still to see the multinational drug companies importing even today intermediates not "as near to the basic chemicals as possible" but "as near to the final product as possible'. The story of formulations is no less sad. The multinational firms have introduced a large number of formulations in the market which a poor country can well do without. As a result the therapeutic field has been so "polluted" that unless drastic measures are taken the industry will continue to play on the gullibily of patients and physicians alike. The hollowness of the arguments in support of retaining brand names of drugs is evident from the fact that in day-to-day medical practice general practitioners who dispense medicines themselves to their patients purchase their requirements of formulations in bulk as generic products because of their low cost. However, the stakes are so high in the battle of brand names that the multinationals can be expected to use all the resources at their command to resist any attempt to touch brand names. The government's reported decision to do away with brand names in the case of a few drugs reflects a halting approach to the problem. Unless a bold decision is taken, the impact on prices resulting from the abolition of brand names will be hardly visible.||
29/5/1976- ||special articles||4364668||Health Care Delivery System in India: Alternative Approaches||An examination of the causes of death in India suggests that greater emphasis be given to preventive measures in the health care delivery system. The poorer state of health in the rural areas calls for higher priority to the provision of medical care in rural areas. The nature of the prevalent diseases and the constraints of resources warrant a less sophisticated medical technology. Finally, an integrated approach, involving immunisation, environmental sanitation, public health education, nutrition and medical care, is necessary for solving the country's health problems.||P. G. K. Panikar
28/8/1976- ||special articles||4364891||Water Accounting in Irrigation Projects: A Technique from Maharashtra||Too much attention has been given to irrigation hardware in India, too little to the 'software'. There are good reasons for suspecting that large improvements in the performance of canal-irrigated agriculture are possible by means of (low-cost) changes in the administrative machinery, within the limits set by existing physical structures. More attention needs to be paid not only to better enforcement of crop zoning, but also to the more obvious and more neglected question of how to get better feedback to the canal operators about crops and locations, and encourage them to use that information to exert better control over water. Here the Maharashtra method of water accounting may have much to commend itself.||Robert Wade
28/2/1976- ||review of management, february 1976||4364408||Managerial Effectiveness: An Action Plan||Unlike other inputs, managerial resources are not easily amenable to programming and control. This is mainly due to social, cultural and individual personality factors, which are complex variables not easily understandable like technological or physical resources. In developing countries like India, where Western management institutions, practices and education have been imported in a wholesale fashion, the problems of maximising managerial effectiveness get doubly compounded. In this paper, we propose to examine the nature of managerial effectiveness in the Indian environment and develop an action plan for its improvement.||R. S. Ganapathy,T. V. G. Krishnamurthy,R. V. Ragavan
1/2/1976- ||unequal exchange||4364363||Tendency towards a New International Division of Labour: Worldwide Utilisation of Labour Force for World Market Oriented Manufacturing||The presently observable worldwide industrial relocation in manufacturing (within the traditional industrial centres and towards the periphery) is the result of a qualitative change of the conditions for capital expansion and accumulation enforcing a new international division of labour. To pose the problem in terms of an absolute fall of the profit rate in the traditional manufacturing centres forcing capital to relocate part of its production would be quite inadequate. The question to be answered (which is, in fact, answered by the movement of capital) is whether production at the traditional sites of production or production at new sites provides for better expansion and accumulation of capital under "given" conditions. As yet, it is hardly possible to estimate the extent of the displacement of manufacturing resulting from the trend towards worldwide industrial relocation. There is evidence, however, that in some places in the world a significant part of the labour force which belonged to the industrial reserve army only a few years ago has been converted into an active labour army in the meantime. There are indications that not only the border regions of Western Europe, not only Middle America, North Africa, South Africa and Southeast Asia, but increasingly so Eastern Europe, South America, Central Africa and South Asia are providing sites for relocated manufacturing.||Folker Frobel,Jurgen Heinrichs,Otto Kreye
