27/3/1971- ||review of agriculture, march 1971||4381797||Dilemma of State Tube Wells||In the area studied in western Uttar Pradesh the capital cost of state tube wells is seven and a half times as high per unit of pumping capacity as that of the private tube wells. There is thus economic pressure to spread out the overhead costs by achieving high rates of utilisation. State tube wells operate much closer to engineering capacity than do the private tube wells. They pump twice the volume of water and irrigate three times the hectarage per unit of pumping capacity of the private tube wells. But such rates result in increased breakdowns and the consequent unreliability of water supplies. In situations of traditional crop patterns, traditional varieties, and low levels of fertiliser use, such unreliability is not costly - though it does tend to discourage input such as the introduction of high-yielding varieties and high levels of fertiliser use. Given the comparative costs, pricing systems, crop patterns, and yields shown in the following survey, a change in the operation of state tube wells to resemble the operation of private tube wells would result in substantially decreased revenues to the state tube wells but it would greatly increase returns to society as a whole. [The authors are grateful to Uma J Lele for substantial corrections and improvements introduced into this paper.]||John W. Mellor,T. V. Moorti
02/10/1971- ||special articles||4382599||Growth of Radical Economics in the US||The disaffection with orthodox modern economics that has led to the growth of the new radical economics in the United States is part of a more general process of change that has profoundly affected American society in the past decade. The attempt to develop a new radical economics represents an effort to provide an intellectual basis for a more effective attack on the manifest ills of American society than the discredited liberals could mount in the past decade. The radical wants to understand better why poverty, racism and sexism persist in the United States, why American troops and bombs continue to be sent to distant lands to wreak their havoc on innocent peoples, why the natural environment is destroyed in the name of progress, why increasing wealth does not appear to lead to greater human welfare but only to a heightened sense of alienation on the job, in the community and at home. The radical suspects that these problems are in fact deeply rooted in the basic institutions of American capitalist society. To understand and to combat these problems, the radical requires an analysis of the fundamental nature, structure and dynamics of that society. This article seeks to describe briefly the origins and the content of the new radical economics that has attracted increasing attention and a growing following in the United States.||Thomas E. Weisskopf
1/7/1971- ||environmental planning||4382343||Environmental Quality Management and Development Planning||There is a section of opinion which holds that environmental quality management is something developing countries need not think about for some time to come, till their GNP has reached high enough levels. But this is a limited view, both of development which should signify more than just economic growth and of processes by which damage to the environment occurs even as GNP is being increased. This article argues that developing countries cannot afford to take such a restricted, accounting view of their long-term development. The planning in developing countries should encompass objectives that are not strictly calculable by cost-benefit analysis and methods that capitalise on public participation. [This paper written in co-operation with the Secretariat of UNESCO was prepared for the Panel of Experts on Environment and Development, convened in June 1971 in Founex, Switzerland, by the Secretariat of the UN Conference on the Human Environment.]||Ignacy Sachs
06/3/1971- ||special article||4381715||Fluctuating Voter Loyalties: Budhlada Assembly Constituency in 1969||This article is an attempt to find a consistent pattern in the distribution of votes among the parties in the 1967 and 1969 elections in Budhlada Assembly constituency, which is part of a socio-economically diverse region and has never had very constant voter loyalties. Over a period of 19 years, Budhlada voters have exercised their franchise eight times - each time, differently. The major contenders for political power have been the Congress, the Akali Dal, and the Communists. A breakdown reveals that, while the first two parties held the seat for nine years each, the Communists secured it for one year. In view of the keenness of electoral competition and the shifting voter loyalties in Budhlada, it is interesting to examine the circumstances that determined voter support in 1967 and 1969. It is found that while intra-party harmony and campaign strategy and organisation may have immediate impact, the socio-economic context is also highly relevant to the voting decision. As the proportion of agricultural labourers increases, for instance, the drift is Leftward; similarly, as the distribution of Government patronage in terms of amenities decreases, the drift is towards the opposition. The stability of electoral politics, it would seem, depends largely on the ecological make-up of the area, the socio-economic context playing a crucial role in the elections. Low concentration of scheduled castes, high literacy rate, less pressure on land, low proportion of agricultural labourers, greater participation in economic activity, and lower concentration of displaced persons - appear to be factors that give a polling area a stable support base. On the other hand, high social and economic diversity results in fluctuating voter loyalties, making the area shift its support from time to time.||R. Chandidas
25/9/1971- ||review of agriculture, september 1971||4382560||Resource Allocation in Indian Agriculture||The so-called New Agricultural Strategy was officially launched in 1965 but actually was quietly under way since 1959, thanks to the report of the Ford Foundation team of experts on "India's Food Crisis". The Fourth Plan relies on the New Strategy for as much as 66 per cent of additional foodgrains output. What is the logical foundation of this strategy under Indian conditions? What are the alternative strategies, if any? In what respect is the New Strategy superior to these others, if at all? These questions have not been even posed, let alone examined. One is thus led to conclude that perhaps India has hardly ever taken such a momentous, far-reaching step, as the New Strategy is, with so little prior analysis. The calculations attempted in this paper of the relative costs per tonne of wheat under two alternative strategies are admittedly crude and, hence, not necessarily conclusive. But the strategy of extending irrigation to hitherto dry land for cultivation with largely traditional methods may be even less expensive than the New Strategy based on 'modern' inputs. It is well known that in India there exists a wide gap between the capacity of an irrigation system and the actual utilisation thereof. No less serious are the malpractices and inefficiency of actual distribution of irrigation water, the lack of drainage and the deficiencies in design of irrigation projects. It is all the more surprising, therefore, that nonetheless the contribution of irrigation water to agricultural productivity in India has been so significant. The New Strategy benefits the relatively big farmers; and its overall impact on small cultivators and landless labourers still remains dubious. It has an inherent tendency to give rise to 'enclave' economies. In the perspective of acute rural poverty and unemployment, this strategy may not turn out to be an unmixed blessing. The entire gamut of resource allocation in Indian agriculture, therefore, calls for a fresh, rigorous scrutiny.||Ranjit K. Sau
1/7/1971- ||politics and performance||4382333||Challenge of the Hustings: From Electoral Manipulation to Policy Performance||The Lok Sabha election in March 1971 was unprecedented in two ways. For one thing, for the first time since Independence the very consolidation of the political system was decided by reference to the ballot box. Secondly, such a fundamental political issue was posed and decided by reference to a clear commitment to policy goals; for the first time a party in government went to the people for a 'mandate' based on a socio-economic programme to which it said it was itself committed. The 1971 election in this respect marks a watershed in the nature and style of Indian politics. This has clear and far-reaching implications for the policy process, for leadership and for administration. Among other things, it poses the dilemma of how to bring about basic discontinuities in political and administrative functioning in a democratic set-up whose style and ethos are incremental rather than catastrophic. It can be done - and perhaps done better and more rationally in a democracy - provided the basic message gets home and the temptation to slip back into general complacency and hackneyed cliches is held in check. It is equally necessary to hold in check the tendency - all too prominent so far in our planning and management of public affairs - to contract out the main tasks to one-way experts whose competence in their own narrow fields of specialisation is matched by an almost total ignorance of the socio-political context in which they operate. The needed decisions in respect of policy choices and priorities must be made by the top policy elite itself. With the unequivocal result of the election the national scene has shifted from the constituencies to the legislatures and even more to the ministries and the secretariats. It is a shift from the game of politics to the interstices of planning and administration.||Rajni Kothari
30/10/1971- ||special articles||4382694||Consumer Prices and per Capita Household Consumption in Rural India: Variation between States||Budget data collected in the 18th round of the NSS has been utilised for constructing indices of consumer price variation among the rural areas of the different states of India. Consumer price indices, computed to compare the price level in each state with that in rural India as a whole, are also employed to compare the average per capita total household expenditure in the different states at rural India prices. A major limitation of the price differential indices is the exclusion of item-groups like education and durables. Besides, there are inherent limitations of NSS household budget data which are not collected specifically for purposes of construction of consumer price indices. The findings may have been partly vitiated, therefore, by the unrecognised factor of quality variation. Finally, there are the intrinsic limitations of interregional comparisons of consumer prices owing to climatic or other environmental differences.||N. Bhattacharya,G. S. Chatterjee
27/2/1971- ||review of management, february 1971||4381681||Industrial Waste and Quality of Environment: A Problem for Management||While the technical aspects of pollution of the human environment by industrial wastes have received considerable attention, the management angle of it has not been considered in sufficient depth. An attempt is made in this article to explore what is involved in the conserving of the environment, and to suggest measures for assessing, managing, and controlling the wastes that lead to the environment's deterioration. It is argued that, if the pollution problem is to be forestalled or at least controlled, waste management will have to be incorporated into the project planning stage. To do this effectively, engineers of all specialisations will have to be trained from the start to view the problem in its entirety and not merely from within the narrow confines of their particular field.||Sudhir Deshpande
1/7/1971- ||growth strategies||4382347||The Theory of Efficient Neocolonialism||This article, and the three others which follow it, attempt to critically examine the approach to development planning suggested by Jagdish Bhagwati and Padma Desai in their book "India: Planning for Industrialisation" which is one of the series of studies of Industrialisation and Trade Policies sponsored by the OECD. Bhagwati and Desai's recommendations, the author argues, come straight out of the stable of resurgent neoclassical theory. They are eloquent on the inefficiency of arbitrary decision-making by bureaucrats and in its place they want to introduce the discipline of the market. The evils of competitive waste are well known but they are recapitulated here to get a perspective on the changes in planning strategy recommended by Bhagwati and Desai. The basic fact is that the desired volume of saving for society as a whole can never be achieved by the price mechanism unaided by central guidance. Many of the delays which Bhagwati and Desai attribute to the bureaucracy were really due to the shortage of savings and productive equipment: delay was, and remains, a method (though rather an arbitrary one) of rationing scarce resources. At the micro-economic level, the wastes of competition arise because of two different sets of factors. One set concerns the lack of co-ordination of production and investment decisions under atomistic competition. The other concerns the fact that competition is never perfect, particularly in the long run, and in the presence of any serious disequilibrium between supply and demand. The first set of factors has been adequately analysed as the anarchy of capitalistic production by Marx, the effect of dynamic external economies by Rosenstein-Rodan, Nurkse and Scitovsky and the consequence of 'secondary uncertainty' by Koopmans. This paper concentrates on the second set of factors. Concluding, the author suggests that there is another approach to development planning, different from that of Bhagwati and Desai - that of beginning the whole inquiry not with finding ways of encouraging private good but with devising ways of meeting public needs. Attention will then be shifted from individual marginal productivity to the productivity of social groups, from individual earnings to the earnings of whole societies, from the control of individual enterprises to the control of total environment. Egalitarianism may then be recognised not simply as one among several goals to be promoted when the society can afford that luxury but as a natural corollary of jointness of all effort and all consumption. Even in such an economy the price mechanism will play a role and will have to be used to get rather better terms from the external world than India has managed to do as an inefficient neocolonial economy; but social direction will play a much larger part in this than Bhagwati and Desai will allow.||Amiya Bagchi
26/6/1971- ||special article||4382206||Self-Financing Urban Water Supply: A Model for Asansol-Durgapur||It is generally agreed that urban water supply systems must be self-financing, in that water supplied must be paid for according to the volume used by the consumer. However, under the existing, generally poor, economic conditions in the urban areas, there have to be necessary qualifications to this general principle. This article examines whether, in the existing socio-economic conditions of the Asansol-Durgapur urban region, it is possible to sustain such a water-on-payment system. It seems evident that, given the present inequality in incomes and housing facilities, there is no immediate escape from having to depend for funds on government grants and loans. In fact, till such time as the minimum as well as the general level of economic well-being of the urban consumers is improved, the water supply systems will have to be subsidised.||P. K. Saha
1/1/1971- ||competitive politics and electoral change||4381554||Congress Factionalism at the State and District Level in Maharashtra: Some Theories||In analyses of Indian politics, conflicting groups are often identified in terms of caste or communal characteristics; or in terms of conflicting governmental and political roles wherein the nature of the conflict is not clearly or consistently defined (e g, the minister versus the party functionary); or in terms of social status categories (e g, the Patil versus the Deshmukh); or simply in terms of personal loyalties. In such analyses, often, the internal coherence of specific groups or the dissonance between groups is explicitly or implicitly traced to emotional or essentially irrational roots-roots which moreover, have no apparent common foundation. The author's investigation disclosed that such hypotheses did not consistently hold true in many cases and that even where such rivalries did exist, they were at most merely incidental factors which temporarily coincided with or were enhanced by a congruence of other events and factors. An attempt is made here to offer for the reader's consideration a more comprehensive hypothesis which suggests that the factional behaviour of Indian political actors is 'rational', partly in the sense that it is consciously reasoned out by certain politicians with reference to their personal predispositions and interests, and also in the sense that such behaviour follows a predictable pattern which somewhat corresponds with a configuration of environmental factors-socio-economic and political. Analysis of the author's data indicates that antagonistic, political behaviour has, to begin with strong economic roots. Moreover, the disease of factionalism-if it be such rather than a corrective mechanism generated by the system itself-is not due, ultimately, to the lack of selfless commitment to unify party ideals by Congress functionaries, as is often claimed; rather it is generated in part by the party ideology itself. Among the elements of the official ideology, it is specifically the economic philosophy of the 'mixed enterprise' and the way this has been interpreted which has produced a mixed or mixed-up political enterprise within the Congress Party organisation itself. It is this ambiguity toward public and private economic activity in the party ideology-juxtaposing in application mutually inimical economic practices and interests-which is, by extension, carried into the political behaviour of Congressmen. The result is factionalism. Factional behaviour is also generated and sustained by certain compelling needs of the political system within which the relevant political actors function.||Mary C. Carras
25/12/1971- ||review of agriculture, december 1971||4382909||Delivery of Canal Water in North India and West Pakistan||The canal systems in North India and West Pakistan were set up by and large to prevent famine, at a time when it seemed more effective to spread the water thinly to provide each district a measure of famine insurance rather than to depend on transporting grain from surplus districts to deficit districts in this largely pre-railway age. In the context of modern agriculture in which the time of delivery of water is as important as its amount, there are significant defects in the way in which the water is delivered under this system. The farmer cannot control water delivery to ensure its taking place when he needs it, nor can he predict water timing in a particular year so that he can choose his crops and the planting, fertilising and water schedules in such a way as to make the most of the water when he gets it. One important way in which controllability of water might be achieved in some measure would be for farmers to sell water to one another or trade in it. Water trading and water sale are not now permissible. Yet these devices permit those closest to the growing of the crops to determine when water is of value to them and when it would be more advantageous to them to sell water or to advance or postpone its delivery as made possible by complementary needs on the part of others with whom water trading or sale is possible. The idea of small-scale water sales and swaps within a given area may seem radical to those accustomed to a system which does not now include this feature, but a number of contrasting irrigation systems in various parts of the world include such practices. One possible development to facilitate sale and trading of water might be some form of waterusers' associations, comprising all farmers on a given outlet or watercourse, which could contract with the government for timed delivery of water and then manage internally the problem of allocation among ultimate recipients.||W. Eric Gustafson,Richard B. Reidinger
