06/7/1974- ||special articles||4363808||Alternatives in Energy Development||The energy crisis has resulted from the prodigal use of fossil fuels. Utilisation of renewable resources - solar radiation and subsequent forms - is the only long-term solution. The advanced countries have certain disadvantages for a change-over to the renewable energy sources - unfavourable geographical positions and an industrial structure geared to highly concentrated energy consumption pockets. India is not burdened with the same energy tradition. Therefore disposition of technical manpower and material resources to large-scale utilisation of replenishable energy resources should be the long-term objective, which would provide the necessary energy and employment distribution, helping also to eliminate some of the ills of urbanisation.||B. V. Rangarao
12/10/1974- ||special articles||4364077||Conversion of Coal into Oil and Chemicals: A Technology for Self-Reliant Growth||Coal is our most important mineral resource, but we have neglected its use both for energy and as feedstock for chemicals. India's objectives in coal utilisation should be to produce: (i) smokeless coke, coal gas, etc, through low-temperature carbonisation plants; (ii) liquid fuels/chemicals by hydrogenating the coal tar residues of the low-temperature carbonisation plants; (iii) liquid fuels (diesel, kerosene, petrol) and gases from coal; and (iv) clean 'power gas' for both higher power generating efficiencies and preservation of a clean biosphere.||S. N. Ghosh
06/4/1974- ||special articles||4363560||Neglected Opportunities in Irrigation||This article considers two different programmes which attempt to improve water use and management in eastern India. One concerns the Hirukud project, which irrigates 282,000 acres in the Sambalpur district of Orissa; the other is in the Raipur district, just west of Sambalpur in Madhya Pradesh. Both projects attempt to improve water use and management of existing irrigation, by installing field channels to give farmers better control over the water in each field. The two projects represent the two ends of the cost spectrum. The Raipur project is capital intensive and costly relative to the Sambalpur project which consists of a simple system of village field channels installed at minimum cost. This article reports on the internal rates of return from these projects and highlights the importance of technically trained people and alternative project designs in making projects viable.||K. William Easter
28/12/1974- ||review of agriculture, december 1974||4364280||A Case of the Process of Tractorisation||The causes and consequences of farm mechanisation have been discussed largely in the context of well-watered areas which have had substantial improvements in productivity. This paper seeks to study a case of rapid tractorisation in a dry and, by the standards of the 'green revolution' regions, fairly backward area. On the face of it, agro-climatic conditions in the region make the tractor a most uneconomic and wasteful innovation. In fact, it is found that it is precisely these conditions which have contributed the most to the quick spread of tractor cultivation in the area.||N. S. Jodha
1/8/1974- ||approaches to development||4363913||Bio-Gas Plants: Prospects, Problems and Tasks||The initial part of this paper contains a detailed study of whether bio-gas plants will fulfil the demand for a decentralised energy and fertiliser production, particularly in the large number of small villages which, on economic grounds, are going to be by-passed in the rural electrification programmes. Considering a village of 500 persons, 250 cattle and 100 houses, it is shown that, despite a 75 per cent dung collection efficiency, a low bio-gas yield of 3 cft per lb dry dung will provide a total energy of about 667.5 KWH per day at a generating cost of about 5 paise per KWH. This energy output is over 30 per cent more than the 500 KWH per day now consumed by such villages from both commercial and non-commercial energy sources. Further the bio-gas energy output is sufficient for 10 pumpsets (200 KWH per day), 5 industries (50 KWH per day), one light in every house (67.5 KWH per day), energy for cooking in every house (200 KWH per day), and 150 KWH per day for miscellaneous purposes. In contrast, rural electrification programmes are only targeting for about 100 KWH per day thus compelling the continued use of non-commercial fuels, and as a consequence, the continued loss of fertiliser and forest through the burning of dung and firewood. The items for a cost-benefit comparison of bio-gas energy production vs rural electrification are tabulated, and appear to favour the former. In addition, the bio-gas plants will produce about 295 tonnes per year of organic manure, corresponding to about 4.4 tonnes of nitrogen per year from which the minimum additional yield of foodgrains may be expected to be about 22 tonnes. This fertiliser output is more than the village's requirements on the basis of current average consumptions of nitrogen per hectare. Further, fertiliser production from bio-gas plants appears to have several advantages over production from large-scale coal-based plants from the point of view of the saving of capital and the generation of employment. Despite these obvious benefits which are likely to accrue from currently available bio-gas plants, it is stressed that drastic reductions in plant cost must be achieved to prevent the Government plans from being woefully inadequate for exploiting the full potential of bio-gas production of energy and fertiliser. The concept of solar energy plantations to grow plant matter for fermentation in bio-gas plants is described; and calculations are presented to show that one acre of a water hyacinth plantation can produce in a bio-gas plant about 165 KWH per day in addition to 1.23 tonnes per year of nitrogen in fertiliser and 0.37 tonne per year of edible protein. The following crucial socio-economic problem will be generated by the installation of bio-gas plants in a village: if the programme is not intended to serve the rural rich only, then the energy demands of villagers who do not own cattle must be satisfied, failing which they will continue burning dung cakes and firewood. The solution to this problem will determine the success of the bio-gas programme from the village and national point of view. The concluding part of the paper contains a listing of a number of major R and D problems. The range and character of these problems require that they be tackled by major institutions.||C. R. Prasad,K. Krishna Prasad,A. K. N. Reddy
23/11/1974- ||special articles||4364182||Self-Identity among Scheduled Castes: A Study of Andhra||In terms of social and economic status there are clear differences among the Scheduled Castes. There is a well-recognised hierarchy among them. No all of them are untouchable; even among those that are, there are degrees of pollution. There are also religious cleavages among the Scheduled Castes. Despite these differences, however, the Scheduled Castes have been ascribed a clear identity by society and they themselves are growing aware of a shared status. This paper examines some aspects of the historical process by which the Scheduled Castes in Andhra Pradesh - and in particular in the coastal districts of the state - have gained a sense of shared identity.||Uma Ramaswamy
29/6/1974- ||review of agriculture, june 1974||4363781||The Bamboo Tubewell: A Low Cost Device for Exploiting Ground Water||The bamboo tubewell, introduced in Saharsa in Bihar in December 1968, has brought the tapping of groundwater well within the reach of small cultivators. This paper discusses the special advantages of the bamboo tubewell and the remarkable results achieved in the districts of Saharsa and Purnea in Bihar. The success of the bamboo tubewell in Saharsa and Purnea has thrown into bold relief the pressing necessity to enforce ceiling and tenancy laws. These two districts are well known for extreme inequality in ownership of land. Big landowners are not interested in the intensive cultivation of their holdings and very few among them have gone in for bamboo tubewells. Most of the bamboo tubewells have been sunk by small and medium farmers. Strict implementation of the ceiling law will pave the way for more efficient utilisation of the available land. A considerable part of the cultivated area in the two districts, particularly in Purnea, is cultivated through share-croppers. It is unlikely that these lands will be irrigated by bamboo tubewells until permanent and heritable rights are conferred on the share-croppers. Strict enforcement of ceiling and tenancy laws is thus a condition precedent for the optimum utilisation of groundwater resources in the districts of Purnea and Saharsa. [The views expressed here are the personal views of the author.]||P. S. Appu
08/6/1974- ||special articles||4363717||Reflections of an Indian Scholar||In India, the author suggests, there is today a wave of what may be called cosmological nationalism, an impetus toward repossessing one's intellectual categories even as one has repossessed one's political fate and one's cultural climate. When there is talk of an Indian sociology and an Indian political science, sometimes what is at stake is a protest against the ill fit of Western social science; sometimes a hope of uncontaminated or less contaminated indigenous categories by which to grasp reality; sometimes a wish that the social scientists and other intellectuals (Indian and foreign) shape up, do relevant social science, and support official visions of the Indian future. Of these only the first two are relevant here. Cosmological nationalism may be, at its narrowest, merely a game for home consumption. At its best, it may be a step toward Indian participation in the reconstruction of a universal social science. The foreign area scholars who work on India and the Indian social scientists have both some unique perspective to bring to that reconstruction.||Susanne Hoeber Rudolph
31/8/1974- ||review of management, august 1974||4363937||Capital Expenditures in Corporate Sector Forecast for 1974||An attempt is made in this paper to forecast investment in the private corporate sector for 1974, by using the data available with the three leading term-lending institutions. Most relevant, in this context, is the time-phasing of capital expenditures on the projects sanctioned by these institutions in the current and in the previous years. Since there is at present a long time-lag in obtaining and analysing the data on company finances for estimating the capital formation in the corporate sector, our method offers a way out by providing - within the end of a year - an indication of the direction and quantum of investment in the corporate private sector in that year. Even after allowing for price changes, the total capital expenditures by the corporate sector in 1974 would be higher than those in 1973. The new commitments made in 1973 and in early 1974 indicate that investment in certain key industries may however lag behind. Unless there is a dramatic change in the investment climate during 1975 itself, the picture for 1975, moreover, is not encouraging.||C. Rangarajan
09/3/1974- ||review of management, march 1974||4363468||Environmental Scanning for Corporate Planning||Analysis of the external environment is cruci al to the process of strategic planning of a large and diversified enterprise in this country where government policy is a dominant force in shaping the future of such enterprises. The task of environment analysis for corporate planning becomes difficult because of the frequent changes in government policies. Yet it is necessary to formulate an operational framework for environmental analysis for a systematised attempt at strategic planning. We have presented in this paper a list of selected economic and regulatory conditions which have been empirically found to have a significant impact on the business operations of a large and diversified industrial enterprise.||Charan D. Wadhva
1/8/1974- ||institutional road-blocks||4363908||Socio-Political Factors and Agricultural Policies||The concept of 'trade-off' between growth and improved distribution is used not only to rationalise and perpetuate the prevailing unequal distribution of agricultural land but also to justify the intensive use (per acre) of scarce inputs like fertilisers and water on large farms and in the developed regions when the social product would be greater by spreading such inputs relatively thinly over a larger number of farms in a wider area. In view of their greater capacity to invest and bear risk, large farmers and the developed regions intensify the use of such inputs producing less than socially optimum output. With the introduction of High Yielding Varieties, the divergence between the private and the social optimum is likely to have increased because it is now privately profitable to apply fertilisers in much higher doses than before. A similar argument may apply to the use of irrigation water. The concept of 'productive irrigation' which has become popular after the introduction of HYV can be used for rationalising the appropriation of water by the influential sections in water-scarce regions even when it is socially more profitable to spread the use of water relatively thinly. This suspicion arises because in certain cases 'protective irrigation' practised under traditional irrigation systems has been found to be socially productive as it yields a larger total output. The failure of the current strategy to bring about the promised agricultural growth and employment through the necessary public investments and the redistribution of resources within the agricultural sector has accentuated the problem of unemployment and underemployment in rural areas, particularly because growth of output and employment in the non-agricultural sector has also been slow. The elite has begun to see in this a threat to the existing political system and has, therefore, come out with several ad hoc crash programmes, such as the Crash Schemes for Rural Employment. Such programmes usually fritter away scarce investible resources and thus widen the resource-gap for developmental programmes. Apart from the growing concern with the problem of unemployment, the proliferation of such crash programmes owes very much to their political suitability for the elite. Unlike lumpy investments in projects like major and medium irrigation which are location-bound and which have a long gestation period, Rural Works Programmes offer the promise of immediate gain to a large number of people in wide areas. Secondly, these programmes help those in power to distribute patronage to a large number of middlemen who have to be rewarded and whose services need to be ensured for future.||C. H. Hanumantha Rao
