Vol. 45, No. 49 (DECEMBER 4-10, 2010)||special articles||Nutrient-Based Fertiliser Subsidy: Will Farmers Adopt Agricultural Best Management Practices?||SACCHIDANANDA MUKHERJEE||The new nutrient-based fertiliser subsidy policy provides implicit incentives to farmers to test soil samples regularly and get crop-wise recommended doses of nutrients, and offers prospective benefits from the agro-environmental management point of view. A study of six villages in the lower Bhavani Basin in Tamil Nadu reveals that despite a strong willingness on the part of farmers to adopt agricultural best management practices, inadequate infrastructure and the high transaction costs involved in accessing such services make them reluctant to test soil samples regularly. This paper looks at the institutional, infrastructural and agronomic factors influencing farmers' willingness, and concludes that the new policy needs to be supplemented with basic agricultural extension services through public-private partnerships.
Vol. 45, No. 42 (OCTOBER 16-22, 2010)||commentary||The Two Cultures Revisited: The Environment-Development Debate in India||JAIRAM RAMESH||There is a continuing tension between those who espouse growth and those who call for environment protection. The two groups do not talk to each other — they are talking at each other and with every passing day, the gap seems to be widening. But the real conflict is not between conservation and development but between environment and the reckless exploitation of man and earth in the name of efficiency.
Vol. 45, No. 41 (OCTOBER 9-15, 2010)||commentary||An Overview of Resistance against Industrial Tree Plantations in the Global South||JULIEN-FRANÇOIS GERBER||Industrial tree plantations for wood, palm oil and rubber are generating an increasing number of conflicts between companies and local populations. Relying on a wide-ranging literature review, this article analyses the alleged impacts of such plantations, the protesters involved, and the modalities of the conflicts. It finds that the prominent cause of resistance is related to corporate control over land resulting in displacement and the end of local uses of ecosystem resources. Resistance includes the "weapons of the weak" and ranges from dialogue to direct confrontation. Authorities have responded by repression in half of the cases reported, while popular struggles have been successful in about one-fifth. These movements can be understood as forms of the "environmentalism of the poor".
Vol. 45, No. 38 (SEPTEMBER 18-24, 2010)||commentary||Capital Myths and the 'New Copernican Revolution'||ADITYA NIGAM||In the prevalent world view, the ecology is perceived as a subset of the economy where intense state interventions and ideological scaffoldings are needed to sustain this rule of capital. However, this order of things seems to be changing where the economy is now, increasingly, being perceived as a subset of the ecology. This is akin to a "New Copernican Revolution" in the way we look at human relations with nature and with each other. Recent instances, like Vedanta's Niyamgiri rejection, indicate that entrenched ideas are changing in India too.
Vol. 45, No. 37 (SEPTEMBER 11-17, 2010)||commentary||The Plane Truth||DEBI GOENKA and GAUTAM S PATEL||The shift of focus from a shared vision of a planned metropolitan region to development for financial profit underlies the City and Industrial Development Corporation of Maharashtra's insistence on the controversial Panvel site for the proposed Navi Mumbai International Airport. The Environmental Impact Assessment report proceeds on two a priori assumptions: that the existing Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport at Santa Cruz/Sahar is incapable of future expansion or development; and that there is no other viable site. In the bargain, it concedes that the site is fraught with environmental and legal issues, but claims these to be insignificant.
Vol. 45, No. 36 (SEPTEMBER 4-10, 2010)||special articles||The Vrindavan Conservation Project||MUKUL SHARMA||The Vrindavan Forest Revival Project, later called the Vrindavan Conservation Project, was launched in 1991 by the World Wide Fund for Nature, to restore ecological order in the region. A study of the project shows certain processes of religious revivalism in environmental politics. The power given to place imagination and the effective use of the symbol of Krishna as an environmentalist in this project finds resonances in sectarian Hindu politics. There appears to be an implicit affinity between the two, often creating a common language.
Vol. 45, No. 33 (AUGUST 14-20, 2010)||insight||The Saga of Sompeta: Public Deception, Private Gains||E A S SARMA||On 14 July, two persons were shot dead by the police in Sompeta village in Srikakulam district of Andhra Pradesh when hundreds were protesting against an attempt to forcibly take possession of land for a private 1,980 megawatt coal power plant that was planned in the area. On 15 July, the National Environment Appellate Authority quashed the environmental clearance that had been given to the project. The saga of Sompeta is one of many arms of the central and state governments colluding with the promoters to turn fact into fiction and give clearance to a polluting project in a fragile ecological area, disrupting thousands of livelihoods.
Vol. 45, No. 30 (JULY 24-30, 2010)||commentary||The Health of Mining and Wealth of Miners||GOPAL K KADEKODI||All discussion of illegal mining, specially of iron ore, has to keep in mind two things. First, the nature of legality cannot be defined in narrow terms of mining laws, but needs to cover the environmental and social goods that lie in its ambit. Second, the massive growth in mining is directly related to the nature of economic liberalisation and loosening of government controls. Present mechanisms of administrative and judicial oversight have proved insufficient to stop this loot.
Vol. 45, No. 30 (JULY 24-30, 2010)||insight||Have the State Finance Commissions Fulfilled Their Constitutional Mandates?||M A OOMMEN||The State Finance Commission, although a technical and quasi-judicial constitutional entity like the Union Finance Commission, has to help local governments plan for economic development and deliver social justice and public services at the local level. This article evaluates the history of the performance of SFCS in general and shows that they have missed a great opportunity to contribute to the process of building a more inclusive, participatory and environment-friendly fiscal federalism via promoting decentralised governance in the country. It argues that the blame is to be collectively shared and shouldered by the union, state and local governments.
Vol. 45, No. 29 (JULY 17-23, 2010)||perspective||Primary Accumulation, Capitalist Nature and Sustainability||SIRISHA C NAIDU and PANAYIOTIS T MANOLAKOS||The relationship between capital and nature gravitates towards a policy of primary accumulation. This article provides an analysis of the imposition of capitalist property rights over natural resources in India as processes of primary accumulation. These processes are evidenced by the construction of large dams and mines, in addition to the proliferation of free market environmentalism. Moreover, the scope for primary accumulation remains substantial in view of the hydel potential and new circuits of accumulation emerge under the auspices of free market environmentalism. Are the desiderata of ecological sustainability and human development realised under the logic of primary accumulation and a neoliberal commitment to economic growth?
Vol. 45, No. 28 (JULY 10-16, 2010)||special article||Can a Tiger Change Its Stripes? The Politics of Conservation as Translated in Mudumalai||DANIEL TAGHIOFF and AJIT MENON||The notification of Mudumalai Sanctuary in Tamil Nadu as a tiger reserve in 2007 has resulted in a contested politics between activists, non-governmental organisations and conservationists with regard to the future of protected area management. This paper presents an account of how these actors positioned themselves around not only the creation of the tiger reserve, but also the proposed elephant corridor and the Forest Rights Act of 2006. It suggests that due process of law has not been followed adequately and that sufficient scientific evidence has not been presented in the public domain as required. The Forest Rights Act is seen to offer an opportunity to democratise the management of natural resources with all its social and ecological complexities and provide the necessary checks and balances to bring about conservation based strongly on scientific evidence.
Vol. 45, No. 26/27 (JUNE 26-JULY 9, 2010)||commentary||Are Conservation Funds Degrading Wildlife Habitats?||SANJAY GUBBI||There has been increased funding for wildlife conservation efforts in recent years. These funds have largely been spent on "habitat improvement" activities. In the absence of a scientific evaluation of such activities, inappropriate management of landscapes has led to human-wildlife conflicts in certain areas. Moreover, funds are being used for construction of conservation structures, forest roads and planting of exotic tree species without assessing the resulting adverse ecological effects and the gradual degradation in the quality of wildlife habitat.
Vol. 45, No. 22 (MAY 29-JUNE 4, 2010)||special article||Climate Change in India: Forgotten Threats, Forgotten Opportunities||NEIL PADUKONE||India's growth-inclined position on climate change appears legitimate. But with the potential to radically alter India's economy, and reshape the human security terrain and even the geopolitical order of south Asia, climate change is an issue on which India has perhaps the greatest to lose. Despite the importance of economic growth, "rising India" and inclusive development are not mutually exclusive. Adaptation to inevitable environmental shifts is necessary; political adaptation – including unity amongst the estranged south Asian neighbours – is imperative to manage the political and security-oriented consequences of climate change.
Vol. 45, No. 21 (MAY 22-28, 2010)||perspective||State of Research on Forced Migration in the East and North-East||GEETISHA DASGUPTA and ISHITA DEY||Among the major aspects of forced migration in India's east and north-east that deserve attention are border and boundary conflict, security, and refugees, the large presence of internally displaced persons in the region due to various conflicts and development projects, and mass-scale displacement due to natural disasters and environmental degradation leading to resource conflicts in recent times. A workshop organised by the Calcutta Research Group in Guwahati in February 2010 reflected on the present body of work and future trends in research on forced migration in India's east and north-east.
Vol. 45, No. 21 (MAY 22-28, 2010)||special article||Rural Accessibility and Development: Sustainability Concerns in an Ecologically Fragile Mountain Belt||RINKI SARKAR||The governments of the Himalayan hill-states and the international donor agencies have consistently advocated disbursal of funds for improvement of road connectivity in keeping with the mandates of a "development paradigm" that advocates the importance of bringing remote mountain villages under the influence of modernisation and change. This paper evaluates the impact of such accessibility in a mid-Himalayan belt of Himachal Pradesh, through field studies. While road mileage has expanded at a fairly rapid pace, initiating development and change in numerous spheres, the paper argues that reckless road construction activities initiated under strategic, political or economic compulsions have adversely affected the fragile environment of the region.
Vol. 45, No. 15 (APRIL 10-16, 2010)||commentary||Decision on Bt-Brinjal: Legal Issues||NUPUR CHOWDHURY and NIDHI SRIVASTAVA||The recent decision of the government of India to impose a moratorium on the release of Bt-Brinjal has been hailed by civil society and scientists alike as a victory for transparency and has demonstrated that the government is responsive to societal demands. This decision is also important since it could set a precedent within environmental regulation with reference to technologies with significant environmental risks. However, the decision also reflects a clear departure from procedure and its legal basis is tenuous and therefore the risk of it being reversed remains. This establishes a clear case for ensuring legal certainty in environmental regulations especially in the case of technologies with significant risks attached to it.
Vol. 45, No. 10 (MARCH 6-12, 2010)||special articles||How Might India's Public Health Systems Be Strengthened? Lessons from Tamil Nadu||MONICA DAS GUPTA, B R DESIKACHARI, RAJENDRA SHUKLA, T V SOMANATHAN, P PADMANABAN and K K DATTA||The central government's policies have inadvertently de-emphasised environmental health and other preventive public health services in India since the 1950s. Diseases resulting from insanitary conditions impose high costs even among the more affluent, and rapid urbanisation increases the potential for disease spread. We analyse the central government's policies and then describe Tamil Nadu's public health system, which offers basic principles for strengthening public health within the administrative and fiscal resources available to most states. We suggest establishing a public health focal point in the health ministry, and revitalising the states' public health managerial and grassroots cadres. There needs to be phased progress in four areas: (1) enactment of public health acts to provide the basic legislative underpinning for public health action; (2) establishment of separate public health directorates with their own budgets and staff; (3) revitalisation of public health cadre; and (4) health department engagement in ensuring municipal public health.
- Vol. 45, No. 9 (FEBRUARY 27-MARCH 5, 2010)||commentary||The Strange Valuation of Forests in India||SMRITI DAS||The ambiguity around the definition of the term "forest" has facilitated easy transition of the boundaries and uses of forests to non-forest categories. Despite the recommendations of a 2005 government committee that was asked to address precisely these questions, an uncertainty characterises practice on valuation of forests as well as the legal and institutional framework for forest governance. These ambiguities give precedence to the interests of the industries over the collective interest of communities and environment.
Vol. 45, No. 9 (FEBRUARY 27-MARCH 5, 2010)||insight||India's Mobility Merchants||RAHUL GOSWAMI||As western auto markets shrink due to environmental concerns coupled with financial tightening and long-term worries about fuel supply, India has witnessed a decade-long steep sales growth rates in all categories of vehicles. The promise of a rapidly growing automobile market has brought every global auto manufacturer of significance to India. The result has been a pattern of consumption of the means to mobility which discourages discussion of its impacts, just as surely as it subdues debate about alternatives. Moreover, the State is powerfully rearranging the landscape with a hugely expensive programme to build a nationwide expressway network that will encourage individual consumption of mobility at the cost of public alternatives.
Vol. 45, No. 8 (FEBRUARY 20-26, 2010)||commentary||Development and Displacement: Resentment in the Kutch||SRINIVASAN RAMANI||A visit to the coastal areas adjoining the Mundra port in the Kutch reveals discontent among fisherfolk, traders and pastoralists over the creation of a special economic zone in the area. Apart from environmental concerns, the traditional livelihoods of residents in the area have also been affected by the new industrial projects, leading to organised protests, as witnessed in Bhadreswar village a few months ago.
Vol. 45, No. 6 (FEBRUARY 6-12, 2010)||commentary||A Structure for Environment Governance: A Perspective||SHARACHCHANDRA LELE, NAVROZ K DUBASH and SHANTANU DIXIT||A report on a round table held in November 2009 on the proposed National Environmental Protection Agency.
Vol. 45, No. 5 (JANUARY 30-FEBRUARY 5, 2010)||special articles||Sardar Sarovar Project: The War of Attrition||S PARASURAMAN, HIMANSHU UPADHYAYA and GOMATHY BALASUBRAMANIAN||The Sardar Sarovar Dam reached a height of 121.92 m in 2006 and at this height the dam has enough water to generate most of the promised benefits — irrigation, drinking water, and electricity. However, currently only 30% of the targeted villages receive regular water supplies, less than 20% of the canal network has been constructed and power generation remains well below the generation capacity reached. Even as the dam construction nears completion, rehabilitation of several thousand families is poor or incomplete. This, for a project that has had clearly laid out legal mandates to alleviate human and environmental costs, and has been under continuous public scrutiny and Supreme Court monitoring. The performance of this project does not seem very different from other Indian major irrigation and power projects: while main civil works somehow get completed, infrastructure and efforts necessary to realise benefits of the projects remain incomplete. The experience of people displaced by the Sardar Sarovar Project is fairly consistent with the experiences of millions displaced by other projects across the country, wherein the State uses the colonial Land Acquisition Act to dispossess people from their homes, lands and livelihoods, and consistently refuses to create just resettlement and rehabilitation entitlements and accountability frameworks to enable restoration of their livelihoods and their dignity. Instead, it promotes cash compensation (often aggressively and violently) to make people give up their homes, villages, land and other natural resources.
Vol. 45, No. 3 (JANUARY 16-22, 2010)||commentary||Trade, Technology Transfer and Climate Change||PURNAMITA DASGUPTA and NISHA TANEJA||Current developments in regulatory regimes raise concerns about the manner in which technology transfer is likely to pan out in the debate on climate change. Existing trade agreements have made developing countries cope with environmental challenges in meeting standards. Given that India's exports face increasing vulnerability if trade measures were to be adopted by the developed countries, existing financial mechanisms for risk mitigation need to be strengthened alongside creation of a separate technology transfer mechanism.
Vol. 45, No. 3 (JANUARY 16-22, 2010)||special articles||A Messy Confrontation of a Crisis in Agricultural Science||SHELLEY FELDMAN, STEPHEN BIGGS and RAJESWARI RAINA||The 2008 food crisis sets the stage for this paper, which explores the processes involved in the International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for Development. The insights drawn are situated in an historical recognition of the interface between agricultural crises and agricultural knowledge. The paper offers a window on both ongoing debates in agricultural science and the experiences of other recent international assessments of energy, the environment, and climate change. It is concerned with analysing how the IAASTD was designed and written, for what it can tell us about the conclusions drawn and controversies raised. The democratic practices underpinning the set of IAASTD reports and the integrated approach to agricultural knowledge, science, and technology, commodity production, and environmental and social goals, are central for understanding contemporary debates about agricultural knowledge.
