30/5/1970- ||special articles||4360056||Monopoly and Public Policy||Recent public discussions on the problem of monopoly rest largely on the naive and unproven assumption that both monopoly and monopoly capitalism are undesirable both from the point of view of growth and from that of other social objectives. There is no analytic assessment of the objective situation which has lead to these phenomena nor is there any objective interpretation of their role in such industrial development as has occurred so far. It is argued in section I of this paper that pure monopoly as defined in the text-books is a rare phenomenon and that in a large number of cases short-run monopolistic practices and gains reflect the operation of the competitive principle and represent, in fact, the most powerful engine of growth. To found a family industrial empire is a powerful motivating factor for economic development and, given the distribution of entrepreneurial talent at a given place and time and the objective economic environment and policies, it is natural to expect a few family empires at the top of the economic structure; but it is not often realised that the composition of these families change over a period of time (section II). It is true, however, that the planning process and related policies restrict the operation of the competitive principle and result in strengthening the pure monopoly elements in the market structure of a commodity; if policy goals and policies are not rationally formulated, the planning process itself may strengthen the monopoly elements in the economic structure. Appropriate policies to eliminate the effects of such monopoly elements in the Indian context are discussed in section III of the article.||V. V. Bhatt
07/3/1970- ||special articles||4359700||Bhoothalingam Committee on Depreciation: An Evaluation of Its Recommendations||Business entities are permitted to reduce their gross profits by depreciation allowances which are granted on certain specified assets. The objective is to provide for replacement of a capital asset. Depreciation is computed by applying prescribed rates to the written-down value of an asset. The law also allows accelerated depreciation in the form of an additional "extra-shift" allowance. Development rebate was also introduced as an inducement to capital formation in plant and machinery. Development rebate is granted in excess of the original cost of an asset, thereby providing a sizeable tax remission. The existing provisions regarding depreciation and development rebate have been criticised by Bhoothalingam. The purpose of this paper is to evaluate Bhoothalingam's alternative suggestions. It is contended that the major criticism of the existing methods can be surmounted by making an appropriate adjustment in the balancing allowance or balancing charge computed with reference to the original cost. [The author wishes to thank T R Venkatachalam for many helpful suggestions.]||N. J. Jhaveri
28/2/1970- ||review of management, february 1970||4359675||Data Gaps Facing Business Economists||If practising economists in India were asked to rank the major hazards of their profession, "data gaps" would perhaps receive the highest score. The ease with which business economists in the more developed countries can lay their hands on useful environmental data certainly has enabled them to play an influential role in their organisations. A strategy for improving the data system should undoubtedly receive the higher priority in India. The purpose of this paper is not to make a comprehensive analysis of all the data difficulties facing the Indian business economist. Such an attempt is no doubt important and must be made by the practising economists at an appropriate time. In the present paper, my objective will be to outline a framework for analysing data gaps and to raise some questions about the lines along which efforts should be made to improve the data system. [This is a slightly revised version of a paper presented to the Business Economists' Conference held in Bombay on February 7 and 8, 1970.]||Samuel Paul
27/6/1970- ||review of management, june 1970||4360171||Land Policies of Rajasthan: Some Neglected Aspects||Land policies have to aim at (i) better utilisation, conservation, and development needs of the land, on the one hand, and (ii) land tenure and allied problems, on the other. In the land reform programmes undertaken in post-Independence India, tenure and related problems have been focused on. The other, equally important, aspect of land policy, relating to utilisation, conservation and development needs of the land have received scant attention. In some regions, in fact, these latter aspects of land reform have far greater significance for raising farm productivity than the tenurial aspects have. There are large tracts of Rajasthan that are among such regions. And the purpose of this paper is to highlight the gaps in the land policies of Rajasthan with reference to the arid region which covers nearly three-fifths of the State. [The author is grateful to M D Desai for his very valuable suggestions.]||N. S. Jodha
13/6/1970- ||special articles||4360110||Chemical Warfare in Vietnam||The effects of "advanced" techniques of warfare on people and their natural environment is documented in detail. Quite apart from the slow torture inflicted by napalm, gases which are called "irritants" by the US Army often have fatal consequences for their victims, many of whom are innocent civilians. Defoliant spraying kills vegetation as well as animals and its side-effects include deformed babies. Long-term changes in soil and weather conditions are not yet known.||Navroz Mody
28/11/1970- ||special articles||4360764||Industrial Growth in Gujarat: An Appraisal||It is commonly believed that, since its formation into a separate State a decade ago, Gujarat's industry has made striking progress. An attempt is made in this article to test this belief. It is found, by the various acknowledged criteria of industrial growth, that the State is by no means in the forefront of industrial development. This slow growth of the industrial economy of Gujarat is attributed to the inadequacy of the infrastructure including power, water, roads and communications, and to the concentration of entrepreneurship in the hands of a few castes.||Mahesh Bhatt,V. K. Chavada
28/3/1970- ||review of agriculture march 1970||4359789||The HYV Programme: Variables That Matter||The main findings of the Programme Evaluation Organisation with regard to the HYP Programme in 1967-68 and 1968-69 are already available. The purpose of this article is to highlight some of the findings of the latter year. Doubts about the HYV Programme usually relate to its more limited spread among tenants and small holders as against among owners and larger holders, its dependence on timely supply of inputs such as water, fertiliser and pesticide, and the coverage and quality of extension services for it. Analysis of PEO's findings for wheat, paddy and jowar in their three respectively major producing areas indicates that, though there is some basis, on these scores, for reservations about the success of the programme, there are other pointers to factors that are already making for - and could make for further - success of the Programme.||P. K. Mukherjee
28/3/1970- ||review of agriculture march 1970||4359788||Agriculture in India in the 1970s||There is sufficient experience with the new agricultural strategy now to ask how green is the 'Green Revolution' and whether it is a 'revolution' or merely a small 'palace revolt'. Answers to these questions are a necessary prelude to examination of the demand and supply situation for agricultural products in the 1970s. India could easily end up as importer of 10 mn tonnes of cereal grains by 1980 or suffer the consequences of sharply rising prices if this level of imports did not obtain in the absence of a sharply accelerated and sustained rate of growth in foodgrain production. Considering all that is required to get rapid agricultural development, the Fourth-Year Plan (Draft) does not seem to accord agriculture the priority necessary to achieve this high rate of increase in production. Thus, unless the priorities are changed and changed quickly, another food crisis looms on the horizon for the latter part of the 1970s. Much more remains to be done to adapt the new seed technology to Indian conditions, particularly in rice, where a significant increase in production is yet to take place. But possibly more important, because it will not be easy to come by, is the tremendous investment that must be made in the development of water resources and the elimination of the institutional biases against the small cultivator. It is only when these things are done in adequate measure that the base will be laid for diffusion of the new technology. In addition, there are more than ample opportunities to employ the underemployed and unemployed in the rural areas on well-conceived and well-managed projects of labour intensive forms of capital creation to sustain a rapid pace of rural development that has a tolerable degree of equity in the distribution of benefits of progress. Unless this is achieved, the social and political tensions that have been building up in the countryside for some time, and have been made more acute by the stark visibility of the uneven impact of the new seed-fertiliser technology, could play havoc with the whole development process.||Martin E. Abel
15/8/1970- ||special articles||4360331||Agricultural Enterprise in Burdwan District: Preliminary Findings of Sample Survey||The Fourth Plan Strategy for agricultural development relies on the 'green revolution' being carried further. It therefore becomes pertinent to know to what extent the associated practices have become a part of farming activity. The following article is based on a survey conducted among the farmers of Burdwan district by the Agro-Economic Research Centre, Visva-Bharati, Santiniketan. The survey was conducted with the object of finding out to what extent the green revolution has touched the district and the particular form it has taken there. The idea was to arrive at estimates of the various measures of agricultural enterprise among farmers belonging to different classes defined on the basis of production relations. In the course of the analysis, by different indicators of enterprise and by different size-groups and occupations, no particular class of so-called 'progressive farmers' or 'capitalist farmers' could be located; nor were there signs of semi-feudal relations in agriculture being strengthened. What emerged-and needs to be more deeply tested-is that farming is still within a traditional framework of practices and the latest technology has entered that framework but failed to make any major impact on it. None of the customarily associated attributes of the latest technology-such as large holding-size, intense use of fertiliser, calculated water management, use of improved seed varieties-constitutes an essential part of the practices of those who are extracting the most out of every given acre of land. It appears that, in a predominantly small-cum-tenant farming and water-scarcity situation, expansion efforts are reaching saturation point. Without tackling these constraints, a green revolution cannot be wished in. [The Agro-Economic Research Centre is particularly grateful to Ashok Rudra, its Technical Adviser, for his guidance of the project at different stages.]||
29/8/1970- ||review of management, august 1970||4360398||Parsi Seths as Entrepreneurs, 1750-1850||This paper traces the growth of the Parsi business community over a period of 100 years till 1850. The author suggests that in the favourable circumstances then prevailing, a modern ship-building industry should have been the natural outcome of Parsi enterprise but for the hostility of the then ruling power which by discouraging the incipient ship-building and navigation industry halted and distorted a potential industrialisation process. The growth of the Parsi ship-building industry during this period did not take place in a vacuum. It had the congenial environment of overall, multi-dimensional progress of the Parsi community. Even finance, without which no potential industry could have made any advance, was becoming highly organised and was abundant. At the same time, the Parsis were prudent enough to avoid competition with the British. They collaborated with British agency houses as brokers or junior partners or as both. They entered into a symbiotic patron-client relationships with the British. Every Parsi millionaire had one or two British patrons. The former lent their money, the latter their imposing names and this worked remarkably well in the colonial business world. The Parsis also found it convenient to put Europeans in charge of their ships. Further, the practice, which was almost customary with the Parsis, of apprenticing their wards with European firms further strengthened their ties with the British business community. The Parsi business community thus emerged as a comprador capitalist class right from its origin. In fields ranging from supply of cotton to the British textile industry to distributing British manufactures all over northern, central and southern India and the marketing of contraband opium from China, their role was crucially useful to British interests. Shipping was, however, the one exception; here the initial success of the Parsis in developing an indigenous shipping industry was definitely frowned upon by the British. [H Rairkar prepared a card index of names and other antecedents of all Indian ships mentioned in the relevant documents for the period for my use. This was helpful for cross-checking information obtained from diverse sources.]||Amalendu Guha
03/1/1970- ||special articles||4359501||Investment Decisions on Pumpsets: A Case Study of a Saurashtra Village||Scarcity of capital and of water for cultivation are major problems in agricultural development. Judicious utilisation of both is, therefore, necessary. When in the case of lift-irrigation, wells and pumpsets are co-operatively owned, they are best utilised. But there are cases of non-co-operation among well owners and this often leads to over-investment in lift-irrigation machinery, viz, to more than one pumpset in a single well. The purpose of this article is to highlight such a situation of over-investment through a case study, and to probe into possible ways of avoiding it. [The authors are grateful to D K Desai and S M Patel for the valuable suggestions they made.]||P. P. Madappa,K. V. Patel,N. T. Patel
27/6/1970- ||review of management, june 1970||4360166||Water Management in the Seventies||The problem of managing water as an agricultural input - along with good seeds, fertilisers, pesticides and mechanisation - is essentially that of effecting a change from the traditional to the modern. Against the traditional approach of using often scanty supplies of irrigation water as "something wet to put on a field", modern water management covers the integrated processes of canal intake, conveyance, regulation, measurement, distribution and use of water on farms as well as removal of excess water from farms in proper amounts and at the right time to ensure maximum crop production and water economy. Intensification of agriculture through use of high-yielding varieties and fertilisers results in more exacting demands as to timing and amounts of water to meet the increased moisture stress in plants at critical growth periods. Irrigation projects of the future should, therefore, provide for delivery systems which are "controllable" with respect to their capability to deliver water when needed. Also, ground-water development should generally be integrated with surface water development to provide a comprehensive system. Economies in the use of irrigation water should be a "built-in" feature of future development of irrigation. In essence this means careful selection of soil to be irrigated, cropping patterns with appropriate mixes of high and low water stress crops, methods of irrigation adapted to soil characteristics, slope, crop type and climatic factors, efficient delivery systems, minimisation of evaporation, timing of irrigation to suit crop stages and control of acquatic weeds. To achieve these objectives it will be necessary to pre-plan the interrelated features of agricultural production and engineering through a multi-discipline approach. Agriculture and irrigation are State Government functions and not until States adopt and implement policies of modernising water distribution and application systems for efficient crop production will there be significant motivation for intensification of agricultural production. Perhaps the studies underway by the Irrigation Commission will focus attention on the need for organisational adjustments at State and Central Government levels to more adequately meet the challenges of efficient water management. [The views expressed in this article are those of the author.]||Donald A. Williams
26/12/1970- ||review of agriculture, december 1970||4360879||Capital Inputs in Punjab Agriculture 1950-51 to 1964-65||Adoption of the new agricultural technology in India seems to have been accompanied by an increased investment in new forms of capital equipment by farmers. The most pronounced increase in this respect has taken place in Punjab, and to a lesser extent in Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh. On the whole, the increase has been greater in the wheat belt than in the rice belt. The evidence however suggested that farmers in Punjab had begun to invest in these capital assets tion to the stock of fixed capital during the period, the composition of the stock of fixed capital shows remarkable change with the newer types of capital assets increasing considerably and the flow of services from fixed capital increasing in the same manner as the stock of fixed capital. Similarly, while the increase in working capital parallelled the increase in fixed capital, the share in it of newer inputs such as fertiliser, water, electricity, fuel oil also increased significantly. The evidence however suggested that farmers in Punjab had begun to invest in these capital assets long before the new agricultural technology made its appearance, though now, with the scale of growth in output in Punjab, some restructuring of the capital assets may be called for. [The views expressed in the article represent the author's own.]||B. Sen
11/7/1970- ||special articles||4360230||State Government and Local Administration: From Control to Co-operation||The concept of local autonomy versus State powers is outdated. If government is to function as a service for the benefit of the people, State and local administrations must work as two active and co-operative members of a partnership. For this purpose, State controls over local government bodies should be subtle and carefully balanced to forestall malpractices while avoiding any tendencies which stifle local initiative. These controls should be reduced in number and rationalised by working out model bye-laws, regulations and budgetary patterns. State governments ought to intervene only when prescribed standards are not adhered to, allowing local bodies to frame their own particular procedures and regulations. Inspectorates of local bodies should be established by ministries of local government to maintain specialised and sympathetic liaison between the two partners. These are among the suggestions spelt out in detail in the article below.||Mohan Singhal
1/7/1970- ||contexts and catalysts of change||4360262||Is the Modernity-Tradition Model All Bad?||There is a tendency today to denigrate the old dichotomy between tradition and modernity. It is necessary to tread cautiously here because there may be a danger of the baby being thrown away with the bath-water. While 'traditional' and 'modern' do in some sense refer to social structures that are radically different enough from each other to be mutually exclusive, an analytical distinction needs to be made between the ways in which traditional societies-and the institutions and values of which they are constituted-are genuinely different from modern societies, and the ways in which modern societies can accommodate social structures and cultural values which bear more than a chance or casual relationship to the traditional societies that preceded them or out of which they historically grew. The problem can be best dealt with by turning to some of its concrete manifestations, say in Japan and India. We see then that many of the social forms that seem to be a carryover from the traditional system are not in fact old forms that persisted. Rather, they are new forms with old names and have recruited their members from the old by using sufficient quanta of cognitive and conceptual material to sustain within them a sense of cultural continuity. To let what makes for such continuity constitute grounds for sounding the death-knell of the tradition-modernity model is assuredly to throw away the baby with the bath-water.||Harold A. Gould
