09/8/1980- ||special articles||4368952||Assam: A Colonial Hinterland||This article argues that there has been a systematic exploitation of the rich resources of Assam, before 1947 by the colonial rulers, and since then by the Indian State and Indian capitalists who have continued the colonial tradition. It details some of the features of this exploitation in the extractive industries of oil, tea, jute and forest products. A common charge levelled against the current movement in Assam on the foreigners' issue is that it is diverting the attention of the masses from the basic problem of economic underdevelopment. The author argues that, on the contrary, the movement has highlighted these fundamental causes of economic underdevelopment. Indeed, a positive outcome of the current agitation, according to the author, is the growing awareness of the colonial pattern of the exploitation of Assam's natural resources among the masses of the Assamese people. Only a realisation of the colonial pattern of exploitation of Assam's resources can help one to understand the more fundamental causes behind the wide and sustained participation of both rural and urban masses in the current movement in the state.||Tilottoma Misra
27/9/1980- ||special articles||4369126||Politico-Economic Developments in Maharashtra: A Review of the Post-Independence Period||The two main political developments of the early post-1947 period in Maharashtra were the establishment of Maharashtra state and the displacement of the old urban-dominated political leadership in the region by a new leadership from the advanced rural elements in which the Marathas (or the Maratha-Kunbis) are the dominant caste cluster. Both these developments reflected the wider spread of political consciousness and democratisation of politics which had been taking place, before and after the acceptance of adult franchise and a republican constitution in 1950. The economic development of Maharashtra, with the great concentration of industry and business and the service sector in Bombay and its suburbs, shows that, in spite of their protestations to the contrary, the political leadership hailing from the affluent sections in the rural areas has made its peace with the Indian big business, at the expense of the common people in the city of Bombay and in the countryside. This paper analyses political and economic developments in Maharashtra since independence. Sections I and II, published this week, deal with developments of the early post-independence period upto the formation of the separate state of Maharashtra in 1960 and sections III and IV, which will appear next week, with developments in the post-1960 period.||A. R. Kamat
27/12/1980- ||review of agriculture, december 1980||4369378||On Substituting Management for Water in Canal Irrigation: A South Indian Case||How is water to be delivered in a canal system: by 'continuous' or 'rotational' flow? In India, rotational delivery has been the normal rule in the canals of the north, while in the south continuous flow delivery has been the rule. What is surprising is not that continuous flow has been the normal rule in south India, but that even when water becomes scarcer than normal because of a drought during the growing season, little attempt is made to shift to a rotational delivery rule. The result is that those in headreach positions get preferential access to whatever supplies are available and the shortage is passed down towards the tailend areas, where water arrives in amounts too small to be used. This paper describes a case in south India where water-saving changes in rules of delivery and management effort and planning were made in response to a severe drought mid-way through the growing season. For the first time in the canal's 100-year history, a rotational delivery schedule for the whole canal was formulated and (more or less) implemented. The author describes in some detail how the canal managers responded to the drought as it developed. Detailed accounts of canal operation in practice, such as that attempted here, can help estimate just how serious the canal mismanagement problem is, and how much potential there is for improving canal performance through better operating procedures, without expensive rehabilitation of physical structures. If such potential is large, as this case study suggests, then the rate of improvement in the effectiveness of canal systems can be considerably higher than the present engineering-oriented remedies would lead one to suppose.||Robert Wade
28/6/1980- ||review of agriculture, june 1980||4368794||Some Aspects of Agrarian Structure of Punjab 1925-47||This paper, which is not an exhaustive study of the agrarian structure of pre-independence Punjab, focuses attention on those tendencies and areas within it which contained seeds of social tension and conflict. One major source of actual conflict was the government demand on agriculture in the form of land revenue and water-rate. In fact almost all the peasant agitations in the Punjab during this period - the 1907 agitation in the canal colonies, the agitation in 1924 against increase in water-rate (which was stalled by timely concessions), the kisan sabha and other movements in the 1930s - were related to this problem. The question of indebtedness and the resultant tensions between debtors and moneylenders attracted a lot of attention. However, for various reasons, only the anti-traditional moneylender aspect of this tension was encouraged and focused on, while the role of the newly emerging agriculturist moneylenders was ignored. The paper also examined the existence of stratification within agrarian society, which was further accentuated by the growing differentiation, and its impact on relations between different sections of the agricultural community. The growing tendency towards landlordism and cultivation on batai or sharecropping basis had some implications for the dominant contemporary view of Punjab as a land of self-sufficient peasant proprietors. Lastly, the paper looks at the impact of the world depression, which seriously threatened a break-up of the whole fabric of the existing agrarian relations.||Mridula Mukherjee
27/9/1980- ||review of agriculture, september 1980||4369123||Underutilisation of Groundwater Resources: A Case Study of East Uttar Pradesh||East UP is an important plains region of the vast Gangetic basin that is known for its bounty of water resources, both surface and below ground. Its groundwater potential is today of the order of 2.5 million hectare-metres, adequate for year-round multiple cropping on the 6 million hectare area of the region. At present, barely two-fifths of the groundwater potential has been tapped and two-thirds of the cropping is done under unirrigated conditions. This paper reviews past and present trends in groundwater irrigation (Section I), analyses small and large farmers' preferences among various types of wells (Section II) and in the last section considers the factors that promote or impede the exploitation of groundwater resources. Its principal conclusion is that the programme of rural electrification would have only a marginal impact on groundwater exploitation in the east Gangetic plains unless due attention is paid to other infrastructural improvements, notably institutional reforms, flood control, drainage and communications.||B. D. Dhawan
27/12/1980- ||review of agriculture, december 1980||4369379||Irrigation for Very Small Farmers: Appropriate Technology or Appropriate Organisation?||Under the Integrated Rural Development Programme, envisaged in the Sixth Plan, small and marginal farmers are offered a subsidy of 25 per cent and 33 per cent respectively on the capital cost of a ground-water structure. However, in view of the small and uneconomic size of irrigated land held by such farmers, the benefits of the programme can accrue to them only if the technologies of raising groundwater resources can be shared. Equally important are appropriate organisational solutions to the many problems that will invariably rise in the implementation of such programmes. This paper considers the results of ongoing action research in this field in Ghazipur district, eastern Uttar Pradesh. It first considers two examples of 'hardware' solutions: the twin plunger irrigation handpump; and the irrigation windmill currently being developed in Ghazipur by a voluntary organisation. The paper concludes with a consideration of two organisational or 'software' solutions: mobile pumpsets shared between a group of farmers; and state, community or 'agency' tubewells.||P. B. Ghate
29/11/1980- ||review of management, november 1980||4369271||Consulting for Social Development in India||With the growing concern of the State to improve the lot of vulnerable and deprived people of society, through programme interventions like minimum need programme, education, health and family welfare, the need for pre-investment feasibility studies, on the situation of the target groups has assumed importance. State and funding agencies are increasingly concerned with better pay-off on their investments, in terms of "social development" or "social advance". Consulting for social development has been a need in several states, and of national and international funding agencies committing substantial resources to basic services for rural and urban poor through mother care, nutrition, school education, water supply and sanitation.||Manu N. Kulkarni
04/10/1980- ||special articles||4369147||Politico-Economic Developments in Maharashtra: A Review of the Post-Independence Period||The two main political developments of the early post-1947 period in Maharashtra were the establishment of Maharashtra state and the displacement of the old urban-dominated political leadership in the region by a new leadership from the advanced rural elements in which the Marathas (or the Maratha-Kunbis) are the dominant caste cluster. Both these developments reflected the wider spread of political consciousness and democratisation of politics which had been taking place, before and after the acceptance of adult franchise and a republican constitution in 1950. The economic development of Maharashtra, with the great concentration of industry and business and the service sector in Bombay and its suburbs, shows that, in spite of their protestations to the contrary, the political leadership hailing from the affluent sections in the rural areas has made its peace with the Indian big business, at the expense of the common people in the city of Bombay and in the countryside. This paper analyses political and economic developments in Maharashtra since independence. Sections I and II, published last week, dealt with developments of the early post-independence period upto the formation of the separate state of Maharashtra in 1960 and sections III and IV, which appear below, discuss developments in the post-1960 period.||A. R. Kamat
29/11/1980- ||review of management, november 1980||4369268||International Dimensions of Indian Banking||During the last few years, Indian banks have shown growing interest in internationalising their business activities. Several new offices have been opened in foreign countries. Funds have been raised and disbursed in terms of foreign currencies. A wide range of international banking services have been offered, and the growing list of customers includes Indians as well as non-Indians abroad. Funds have been provided for trading with or by India, as also for economic development in India and other countries. Funds have been raised and disbursed unilate ally as well as in association with other Indian and non-Indian banks. In this paper we propose to examine the nature and significance of the international operations of Indian banks in the furtherance of their business strategies. The paper is broadly divided into four parts. In the first part we shall identify the various forms of the banks' national business and the cumulative effect of the same on the Indian banking system. In the second part we shall examine what has prompted Indian banks to undertake overseas operations and how these fit in with the individual corporate strategies of the banks concerned. In the third part, we shall examine the significance of these move from a national viewpoint. Finally, we shall take a look at the likely future developments in the context of foreseeable environmental changes and the areas in which steps might have to be thought of by individual bank managements and by the government and the Reserve Bank for regulation of the banking system.||G. R. Kulkarni
20/9/1980- ||special articles||4369104||Problems of Tribal Development in Maharashtra||This paper provides a broad profile of the tribal population in rural Maharashtra, specifically in the rural areas of Dhule, Thana, Nasik and Chandrapur districts, and lays down the principles that should guide any official or voluntary programme of tribal development in these areas. On the crucial question of land alienation which is a major problem faced by the tribals, its findings are that the present legal provisions to prevent such land alienation are adequate and even the implementation of these provisions, in respect of lands alienated illegally, has been more or less satisfactory. What is however less satisfactory has been the implementation of these provisions in respect of land 'legally' alienated from the tribal people. The article also finds that the government's resolution on regularisation of the encroachments on forest and government lands by tribals is full of deficiencies and deprives of the majority of tribal encroachers of the intended benefit.||S. D. Kulkarni
