28/11/1981- ||review of management, november 1981||4370428||State Level Public Enterprises: Issues of Autonomy and Performance||This paper describes the evolution and nature of state level public enterprises (SLEP) in India and discusses some of the salient issues of strategy, structure and performance of these enterprises. It seeks to show that the SLEPs are different from the Central public enterprises in terms of their environment, size, strategies, management processes and performance and, therefore, deserve special attention from students of public enterprises. It pointedly draws attention to the paucity of even factual information about the SLEPs and the many glaring contradictions even in official and semi-official accounts regarding such elementary data as the total number of such enterprises in various states. Its findings are that while huge financial and human resources have been invested in various SLEPs and important tasks of social and economic development have been assigned to them, their overall performance has been for below expectations. One of the important causes for such failure is political and bureaucratic intervention in operational matters.||B. L. Maheshwari
26/9/1981- ||review of agriculture, september 1981||4370273||Collective Responsibility in Philippino Irrigation: A New Approach||It is by now a familiar point that many public sector water supply projects are working badly. It is also a familiar argument that substantial improvement requires more delegation of responsibility to water users, for planning and day-to-day management. Less faimliar are serious attempts to explain why, in India, the traditional top-down approach persists even for small 'tank' projects, with engineers continuing to have the dominant role in design and construction, and with the building of local management capabilities continuing to be overlooked. Less familiar, too, are practical suggestions about how the government might go about implementing an approach based on fostering local collective responsibility. Certainly economists, who were the first to demonstrate just how badly many irrigation projects have been working, have contributed little to either subject (Bottrall 1918). Case studies can offer some guidance on how the government might go about fostering local collective responsibility. One such case is the recent attempt by the Philippine government to foster local collective responsibility not only in management but also in design and construction.||Robert Wade
23/5/1981- ||special articles||4369862||Assam's Industrial Development: Urgency of New Direction||Looking at various aspects of the economy of Assam, this paper argues that Assam's present dismal state of affairs is the outcome of a basic structural weakness inherited from the British, but which has been systematically reinforced by the Indian government. While there is a case for Assam's industrialisation, mere setting up of a few industrial units engaged in the processing of non-replenishable natural resources is not only incapable of generating general economic development but is also harmful to the economy as it sucks the region dry of such resources. Moreover, there has also to be a systematic drive for ancillarisation. The paper analyses the role of the three major industries of the state, viz, tea, oil refining and plywood. Industrialisation is viewed as a cumulative process of increase in labour productivity, income, saving, investment, employment, and output, leading to diversification of the economy. It is contended that the petrochemicals industry is capable of contributing to this. It concludes that, while many opportunities have already been lost, attempts must be made to make the best use of opportunities offered by the Bongaigaon Petrochemical Complex.||Atul Goswami
05/12/1981- ||special articles||4370452||Guns or Grain: Macro-Economic Costs of Indian Defence, 1960-70||This article attempts a review of the available evidence about the macro-economic costs of Indian military expenditure during the 1960s. The attempt is considered timely, from two points of view: first, because the international political climate presently prevailing in the region stimulates new pressures for more resources to be put at the disposal of the military sector; and secondly, because the underutilisation of industrial capacity in the Indian economy also supports arguments for increased military expenditure. Apart from some brief remarks about the impact of increased military expenditure on economic development and distributional justice, the article confines itself mainly to an historical analysis of the macro-economic costs during the period under review. The period chosen is both important and illustrative: it was during this period that India's basic defence posture changed; and it was also during this period that the country stepped up its military expenditure, putting to use the industrial (over) capacity built up during the previous plan periods.||P. Terhal
26/9/1981- ||review of agriculture, september 1981||4370271||Utilisation of Canal Water below Outlet in Kosi Irrigation Project: Administrative and Community-Level Solutions||A number of large-scale gravity irrigation projects were the outcome of the irrigation policy during the post-Independence period in India. However, on the completion of these projects, there was a considerable gap between the potential capacity and their utilisation. The Command Area Development programme was formulated by the Central government to solve the problem of underutilisation. However, the performance of the Command Area Development Agencies, covering 71 projects all over the country, has been disappointing. The main reason for the failure of the CAD has been that, while it looks into and seeks to remedy the technical deficiencies of the irrigation projects, it fails to take account of and cope with the institutional reasons for the underutilisation or to remedy the problem of inequitable distribution of water resources among the various socio-economic groupings of farmers.||Niranjan Pant
16/5/1981- ||special articles||4369837||Financing New and Renewable Sources of Energy||The longer-term transition of the underdeveloped countries to an energy rtgime much less dependent on oil and gas may be divided into two distinct phases. The first, over the next two or three decades, will likely involve a 'quick' shift away from oil and gas to greater dependence on coal, tar sands, and oil shale, nuclear fission, geothermal energy and on renewable forms of energy such as hydro, solar, biomass and wind; all of which could be made available in secondary energy forms which will call for modest, manageable changes in the prevailing infrastructure system. The second phase of the transition period would cover roughly the first quarter of the next century. The sustainable energy supply would then have to be expanded to include breeder reactors, fusion, large-scale solar and other renewable forms, all of which are now identified as proven or promising in terms of technical feasibility and economic viability. Among the many constraints on the evolving energy system in the underdeveloped countries, the financing of energy production is among the more significant ones.||Liaqat Ali
26/9/1981- ||review of agriculture, september 1981||4370272||Farmers' Organisations in Surface Irrigation Projects: Two Empirical Studies from Gujarat||In any irrigation system, the institutional arrangements prevalent or proposed to be developed are a prime focus of attention. While the bureaucratic organisation assumes the responsibility of operation and maintenance of the system upto the government outlet, the command area under the latter along with its network of field channels and drains and control structures become the responsibility of the farmers for operation and maintenance. This is the most critical area since under or over-irrigation due to lack of maintenance of community-owned items will affect yields per hectare and generally the performance of the system. This paper discusses formal or informal farmers' organisation to deal with the problems at the terminal level of maintenance, distribution of water and resolution of disputes. The paper is in three parts. The first part delineates the functions of farmers' organisation in an irrigation project and deals with the essentials of an environment under which these organisations come into their own for efficiently discharging their functions. The second part presents two case studies, one dealing with an old project and the other with a recentone. The last part summarises the discussion and lists some policy conclusions.||T. K. Jayaraman
19/9/1981- ||special articles||4370246||Transferability of Raiyati Holdings in Bihar: A Long Journey, 1793-1950||Among the major obstacles to agricultural development is the defective agrarian structure or institutional framework of agricultural production. The common criticism about the land reforms programme in the country is that legislation has been far short of the policy declarations and the implementation has been nowhere near even that watered down legislation. The state of Bihar is considered to be the worst in this respect, both in legislation and implementation. It is proposed to present, in brief, in a series of six papers the salient features of all the legislation undertaken in this respect in Bihar since the introduction of the permanent settlement in 1793 to-date and bring out various lacunae, built into the laws, and other impediments considered to be responsible for their non-implementation. An effort will be made to trace back the evolution of the law stage by stage so that by piecing together the different stages a broad outline of the law, both historically and analytically, is obtained. To begin with, an attempt has been made in this paper (the first of the proposed six) to review the legislation regarding the transferability of raiyati holdings from 1793 to 1950. The subsequent papers will deal with the transferability of raiyati holdings in Chota Nagpur (Bihar), rents of raiyati holdings, machinery for the settlement of revenue matters, status of tenants and the record-of-rights.||D. C. Wadhwa
05/12/1981- ||special articles||4370453||The Orissa Aluminium Complex: Points toward a Debate||The financial viability and the foreign exchange earnings of the public sector Orissa aluminium project depend crucially on alumina prices and the interest rate on the Eurocurrency loan. Given that present interest rates are substantially higher than assumed by the Government of India and given that we do not possess any leverage to make the alumina price reflect the cost of money or the cost of production, the project seems viable only on the most optimistic assumptions about alumina prices and money and production costs. Other issues which need to be considered include the size of the alumina refinery where the global optimality of our French consultant has prevailed over the project's optimum; the very free import of plant and equipment the project demands, which can mean under-utilisation of capacity for domestic plant suppliers; the likelihood of a false picture of competitiveness of alumina export arising from possible subsidy by related public sector investments; the expensive decision on provision of captive thermal sets, given that power is virtually a raw material in the production of aluminium; and, finally, question of pollution from the mining operations and the siting of the refinery.||Kannan Srinivasan,Vinod Vyasulu,S. Rajagopalan
21/11/1981- ||special articles||4370404||Coastal Shipping: Destination Unknown?||This paper attempts to delineate the factors responsible for the adverse trend in coastal shipping and to suggest measures to reverse this trend. In the wake of the energy crisis, the need for rescuing the coastal shipping industry becomes almost imperative, since water transport is relatively more energy-efficient than other modes of transport like railways and roads. A proper appraisal of the role of coastal shipping has been hampered by an imperfect understanding about the cost aspects of this industry. The shipping industry, the port authorities, and the government are perennially engaged in a triangular debate, with cost figures hurled about. The cost figures are propounded by each agency in such a way that any objective onlooker cannot fail to detect a trace of vested interest in every figure supplied. This paper attempts to present a methodology deriving the costs of coastal shipping in a reasonably systematic way. Two estimates of costs have been supplied: (i) financial costs, or the costs actually incurred by the coastal ship operator and (ii) resource costs, or the costs reflecting the true value of the national resources used up in the coastal shipping industry.||D. M. Nachane,P. R. Chary,V. V. Subbarao
