17/3/1973- ||special articles||4362432||The Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972: A Critical Appraisal||The grant of statutory protection from being hunted, trapped or otherwise directly harassed, which is what is practicable in an act, will go only some way towards conserving our fauna, even in sanctuaries. All human activities that are not directed at the fauna with hostile intent (like hunting) but which have a no less depletive potential (such as deprivation of habitat, overmuch disturbance by humanity, competition for fodder by domestic animals being permitted to graze in the preserve and the risk of such cattle conveying epidemic diseases to the wild herbivores) must be eliminated from a sanctuary area before the word 'protection' can have any value in actuality, and this cannot be achieved entirely by a comprehensive enactment adopted by all states, but also needs the co-operation of the people and the governments in other ways, even the reorientation of the attitude of most of our state governments towards their forests. For these reasons, we cannot expect the Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972 to be fully comprehensive in its scope and application: it can, at best, prohibit direct aggression towards certain animals wherever found, provide punitive sanctions for breaches of such prohibitions, lay down that in preserves, in addition to the prohibition or direct aggression towards the animals, certain human activities should be barred, and provide for adequately diminishing, or extinguishing altogether, existing human rights in the area. An act can also prescribe or specify the administrative set-up necessary for the fulfilment of its objectives and provide for contingencies and specify exceptions. The Wild Life (Protection) Act does all this, but not always with that informed awareness of our wildlife crisis that one might reasonably expect of it, and not without the weakness of an avoidable provision for compromise. Nor is it wholly free from formal deficiencies.||M. Krishnan
31/3/1973- ||review of agriculture, march 1973||4362479||A Charter for the Land||The habit of considering land as incidental to narrowly conceived departmental schemes instead of as a single indivisible resource which needs attention in its own right lies at the back of many of our troubles and must be rooted out. Today, the irrigation engineer looks at land as something either to water or to drain (but rarely both), the agricultural soil conservation engineer as something to terrace and bund, the forester as something to grow trees on, and the planner as something which can create largescale employment opportunities - whether for the skilled or the unskilled, whether for landless or the small farmer, whether in wet or dry conditions and whether on a crash or a continuing basis. We thus have a multiplicity of agencies each of which is necessarily interested only in implementing its own schemes without reference to the others and none of which can see the picture as a whole. This is a situation which can be corrected only by creating organisations that can take a synoptic and a sympathetic view of the needs of the land so that these may be catered to in a direct, deliberate and efficient manner. The management of land and soil resources is indissolubly linked with the management of water resources and cannot therefore be attempted without subjecting the latter to some discipline. It is because such discipline has been absent in the past that so little attention has been paid by our irrigation projects to the problems of sedimentation, water-logging and proper water utilisation. It will be necessary to ensure in the future that while on the one hand no new projects are taken up which do not give enough attention to these aspects, energetic steps are also taken on the other hand to remedy such deficiencies in the case of existing and on-going projects. Such a policy will not result in any shrinkage of employment opportunities for engineers, as feared by some, but rather in their expansion. A sound land policy will therefore automatically lead to a sound water policy which lays more emphasis on the development of ground water resources and insists on much more care with regard to surface water schemes. There is little doubt that such a policy will bring about a close working relationship at various levels between the proposed land authorities and the organisations which deal with the development of water resources, both ground and surface. In the fullness of time, the remorseless logic of circumstances will complete this process by demanding the creation of a Department of Land and Water in the Ministry of Agriculture at the Centre and of similar arrangements in the states. In due course, responsibility for various other neglected aspects of the ecological environment will also inevitably get drawn to such departments. Let us, however, take only one small step at a time.||B. B. Vohra
24/11/1973- ||review of management, november 1973||4363222||Computers without Plan||There are two reasons for urgent consideration of the whole complex of problems surrounding the introduction of computers in India. The first is that, following the termination of the licences for sale of reconditioned computers, there has been a virtual standstill in the introduction of computers. The government is now reported to be engaged in negotiations to provide computers for the Indian market - by direct import on easy credit terms or tied to bilateral agreements, by manufacture in India by foreign companies and by fully indigenous manufacture. The second reason is that the Labour Minister has to take a decision, some time, on the recommendations of the Automation Committee. This decision has to be linked to decisions concerning the supply or manufacture of computers, so that use of computers, their effect on employment, and availability of computers, can be considered as an integrated problem. This will give a clear picture of the national requirement of computers of various types and sizes, and will forestall any conflict between manufacturing programmes and planned employment generation.||
09/6/1973- ||review of management, june 1973||4362718||World Bank's Experience with Development Finance Companies||It is much easier to evaluate the performance of an individual development finance company (DFC) than that of the entire group of DFCs associated with the World Bang. The heterogeneity of this group of DFCs and the diversity of their environmental and institutional characteristics makes generalisations about their performance very difficult. So also does the shifting posture of the World Bank, whose own basis of evaluation has changed. This paper makes the effort to reflect on so ne facts which seem unquestionable, and to make some generalisations from them.||William Diamond,Ravi Gulhati
09/6/1973- ||review of management, june 1973||4362716||Maintenance Engineering as an Independent Discipline||Maintenance Engineering is a sophisticated, multidisciplinary technology that must combine the highest skills, judiciously and intelligently applied past experience, the deductive techniques of a Sherlock Holmes, and the entire spectrum of analytical engineering, process knowledge and fabrication technology. Engineers must perceive the true nature of maintenance technology and whole-heartedly participate in it. Industrial management must recognise the true importance of the profession and create an environment that will attract talented engineers to it. Educational institutions must promote its development through the introduction of an integrated course of studies on Maintenance Engineering and also by encouraging the necessary research activity in the area. Even consulting engineers should find this a fertile field.||B. V. Chitnis
