Vol. 46, No. 51 (DECEMBER 17, 2011)||commentary||Inducing Vulnerabilities in a Fragile Landscape||KANCHI KOHLI||In Sikkim at least 17 large hydropower projects on the Teesta River and its tributaries have their environmental clearances in place, despite warnings, improper assessments and negotiated conditions. At a point of time when a natural seismic occurrence has shaken the stability of an already unpredictable Himalayan ecosystem, it is important to revisit the concept of hydropower projects as a green, clean and safe option.
Vol. 46, No. 51 (DECEMBER 17, 2011)||special articles||Turning the Tide: Women's Lives in Fisheries and the Assault of Capital||NILANJANA BISWAS||Over the years, research on women in the fisheries moved from a framework of political economy to a framework of political ecology. This meant that analyses shifted away from labour, production relations and surplus value extraction typically grounded in Marxian modes of analysis, in favour of those focused on environmental sustainability, livelihood sustainability and a discourse on poverty. During this period, women's labour has been mobilised at an unprecedented scale and concentrated in the most exploitative jobs to fuel economic growth in fisheries. Even as industrial fisheries thrive on the labour of poor women, new analyses and new forms of organising are needed to fundamentally challenge this exploitation. Capital cannot be left unfettered to do as it pleases, but must be forced through stringent regulation to heed other considerations apart from profitability alone. Donor aid is, however, driving the non-governmental organisation increasingly towards conciliatory, mediatory roles, incapable of seeking solutions outside the framework of capital.
Vol. 46, No. 50 (DECEMBER 10, 2011)||review of urban affairs||What the Eye Does Not See: The Yamuna in the Imagination of Delhi||AMITA BAVISKAR||This article traces the shifting visibility of the river Yamuna in the social and ecological imagination of Delhi. It delineates how the riverbed has changed from being a neglected "non-place" to prized real estate for private and public corporations. It argues that the transformation of an urban commons into a commodity is not only embedded in processes of political economy, but is also driven by aesthetic sensibilities that shape how ecological landscapes are valued. However, the commodification of the riverbed must confront the fact that the Yamuna is an ecological entity with dynamics that can defy attempts at domestication.
Vol. 46, No. 49 (DECEMBER 3, 2011)||commentary||Environmental Movement in Dahanu: Competing Pulls||MICHELLE CHAWLA and GEENTANJOY SAHU||The environmental campaign in Dahanu near Mumbai against the capacity MW plant started in the 1980s and ultimately led to the setting up of the Dahanu Taluka Environment Protection Authority. Even as competing lobbies continue to push for the de-notification of its status as an ecologically fragile region and removal of the Dahanu Authority the environmentalists walk a tight rope attempting to protect the natural resource base of the region.
Vol. 46, No. 46 (NOVEMBER 12, 2011)||special articles||Missing the Woods for the Ore: Goa's Development Myopia||PRANAB MUKHOPADHYAY and GOPAL K KADEKODI||A recent report by the National Council of Applied Economic Research comparing benefits and costs of mining and forest services finds that mining benefits outweigh the costs they impose. A scrutiny of the methodology of the report suggests an overvaluation of social benefits and undervaluation of social costs. The report also deviates from received practices in environmental valuation of forest benefits. Its conclusions therefore are inaccurate and state policy must be cautious while allowing activities that may cause irreversible damages to Goa's natural wealth.
Vol. 46, No. 40 (OCTOBER 1-7, 2011)||commentary||New Thermal Power Clusters||KANNAN KASTURI||The currently planned expansion of thermal power generation capacity works out to 1.3 times the existing generation capacity. The geographic distribution of this expansion is highly uneven, showing clustering in certain coal-mining states, and further within districts and regions. By backing independent power producers through comprehensive memoranda of understanding, state governments have forsaken the communities that will bear the environmental, health and livelihood impact of these thermal clusters.
Vol. 46, No. 40 (OCTOBER 1-7, 2011)||commentary||Global Vision for Rio+20 and Beyond||MUKUL SANWAL||The various mechanisms evolved through global negotiations to deal with shared environmental problems, such as climate change, fall short because they are not located within a larger debate on dealing with human well-being and instead focus only on limiting damage. The United Nations is best placed to support a common understanding on patterns of resource use that are in principle common for all by generating strategic knowledge, also leading to deepening coherence of the global agenda.
Vol. 46, No. 38 (SEPTEMBER 17-23, 2011)||commentary||The National Environment Assessment and Monitoring Agency: A Step Forward?||SHIBANI GHOSH||The Ministry of Environment and Forests' initiative to set up an independent environmental regulator is a positive one and acknowledges the problems in the current system of regulations. Yet, a perusal of the proposal suggests that it has a number of limitations and therefore has to be rejected. But it is equally important that viable alternatives to the proposed agency are actively constructed.
Vol. 46, No. 37 (SEPTEMBER 10-16, 2011)||special articles||Ecotourism, Sustainable Development and the Indian State||SUCHISMITA DAS||Ecotourism, defined as responsible travel to natural areas, that conserves the environment and improves the welfare of local people, has caught the attention of diverse interests, both as an economically profitable leisure activity, and as a means of conservation and development. In light of the recent debates surrounding the formulation of ecotourism guidelines for tiger reserves, this article undertakes a critical analysis of some of the ecotourism policies and programmes of the Indian government so far. It evaluates the ecotourism discourse specifically within the paradigm of sustainable development, which forms its legitimising base. The fragmented nature of ecotourism policies and practices and the resultant trade-offs unearthed, are then traced back to the contradictions and vagueness inherent in the very conceptualisation of ecotourism as a tool of sustainable development. This shows that revisions in guidelines, without a critical evaluation of the underlying conceptual basis, will not sufficiently address all the lacunae entailed.
Vol. 46, No. 34 (AUGUST 20-26, 2011)||discussion||Employment Guarantee and Its Environmental Impact: Are the Claims Valid?||M DINESH KUMAR, NITIN BASSI, M V K SIVAMOHAN and V NIRANJAN||This note questions some of the assumptions, fundamental concepts and methodologies in "MGNREGA for Environmental Service Enhancement and Vulnerability Reduction: Rapid Appraisal in Chitradurga District, Karnataka" (EPW, 14 May 2011), arguing that the analysis in the paper does not support the authors' claims of multiple benefits from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act.
Vol. 46, No. 28 (JULY 9-15, 2011)||from the states||Farmers' Suicides and Statehood Demand in Bundelkhand||A K VERMA||Farmers' suicides in Bundelkhand are a result of several years of neglect of the agricultural sector and industrial backwardness. Neither the Uttar Pradesh nor the Madhya Pradesh government has made efforts to address the basic issues of ecological degradation, agricultural modernisation and rural indebtedness. The demand for a separate state only serves to satisfy political ends and is no solution for the multiple problems of Bundelkhand's farmers.
Vol. 46, No. 26/27, Supplement: Review of Agriculture (JUNE 25-JULY 8, 2011)||----||Water Harvesting Traditions and the Social Milieu in India: A Second Look||SHRI KRISHAN||India has a variety of local community traditions of water harvesting. There are a number of scholars and activists who tend to valorise premodern wisdoms without critically evaluating their sociocultural context and realising how deeply they were embedded in the social hierarchy of their times. There has been, of course, a great deal of stress lately on a kind of"eco-golden age". This is clearly a case of an "anachronistic projection of modern phenomenon on to the screen of tradition". Seen from such a perspective, all pre-industrial societies would exhibit a kind of harmony with nature. However, most of the times, it was the demographic and technological factors that made these societies less harmful to the environment. It was not that they wished to protect the whole canopy of nature. This reappraisal demonstrates how precepts and rites, culture and customary practices and state policy interact to lay the bases of water harvesting traditions. Social customs are the necessary conditions for sustaining these traditions, while local autonomy in resource management is the critical sufficient condition but it never results in equitable access for all.
Vol. 46, No. 24 (JUNE 11-17, 2011)||notes||The Economics of Ecosystem Services and Biodiversity: An International Assessment||PUSHPAM KUMAR and JOAN MARTINEZ-ALIER||The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity reports were born out of an initiative in 2007 to produce an analysis of the economics of biodiversity loss parallel to that of existing analysis of climate change. The reports do not preach to the committed environmentalist who already values nature. They are geared instead to the sceptical public administrator and to the practical businessperson, aiming to make these actors realise - by means of convincing examples - that economics should go beyond its existing boundaries.
Vol. 46, No. 20 (MAY 14-20, 2011)||special articles||MGNREGA for Environmental Service Enhancement and Vulnerability Reduction: Rapid Appraisal in Chitradurga District, Karnataka||RAKESH TIWARI, H I SOMASHEKHAR, V R RAMAKRISHNA PARAMA, INDU K MURTHY, M S MOHAN KUMAR, B K MOHAN KUMAR, HARSHAD PARATE, MURARI VARMA, SUMEDHA MALAVIYA, ANANYA S RAO, ASMITA SENGUPTA, RUTH KATTUMURI and N H RAVINDRANATH||The activities undertaken under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act in Chitradurga district, Karnataka, were assessed for their potential to enhance and provide environmental services. Key programmes implemented in 20 villages during 2009 were studied using rapid scientific assessment methods. An indicator approach was adopted to analyse environmental services such as water for irrigation and improvement in soil quality. The status of environmental services before and after implementation of the activities was examined and vulnerability indices were constructed and compared. The activities were found to have reduced the vulnerability of agricultural production, water resources and livelihoods to uncertain rainfall, water scarcity and poor soil fertility.
Vol. 46, No. 20 (MAY 14-20, 2011)||notes||Payments for Environmental Services: Issues and Implications for India||BHAGIRATH BEHERA, PULAK MISHRA and NARAYAN C NAYAK||Programmes on payments for environmental services aim to provide economic incentives for the conservation of natural resources. They are expected to generate a continuous flow of environmental services in the long run, along with maintaining their quality. This essay elucidates the conditions required for the successful implementation of PES schemes and considers how well they may do in the Indian context. It foresees a number of formidable challenges in the schemes producing the desired outcomes in India.
Vol. 46, No. 18 (APRIL 30-MAY 6, 2011)||review of women's studies||'They Are Not of This House': The Gendered Costs of Drinking Water's Commodification||KATHLEEN O'REILLY||While women's participation is considered a key element of the sustainability plan of the drinking water supply system, some villagers in Rajasthan do not count women in the households while paying common water charges. This paper explores the social, political and environmental implications of not counting girls as household members and drinkers of water. It tries to find answers to the following questions: What are the implications of girls' non-payment for the cost of drinking water in a shared system? What might girls' non-payment mean in terms of the gendered sustainability goals of the project? What are the implications for women's and girls' political subjectivity, especially where natural resources are concerned? The paper also addresses a gap in the political ecology literature with respect to the gender dimensions of neo-liberal processes in the water sector by suggesting a variety of impacts when girls are excluded from water payment.
Vol. 46, No. 15 (APRIL 9-15, 2011)||special articles||Forest Rights Act 2006: Undermining the Foundational Position of the Forest||SAVYASAACHI||This essay argues that the Forest Rights Act 2006 is designed on the principles of labour teleology. It undermines the foundational position of forests, prepares them to become a playground for profits and minimally serves the interests of the marginalised tribal and forest dwellers. The paper describes the basic features of labour teleology and the notion of foundational position in its historical context. It then proceeds to describe the historical process of labour teleology in India and its impact on the forest. It locates FRA 2006 in the development of capitalism and goes on to show that by destroying the foundational position of forests, this Act turns forests into an ecological service provider for capitalism.
Vol. 46, No. 15 (APRIL 9-15, 2011)||notes||Saffronisation of the Holy Cow: Unearthing Silent Communalism||SMITHA RAO||The principles of environmentality are employed in this study to look at how law, science and policy can mould environmental subjectivities of people to conflicting ends. The study locates the environment and animalrights debate within the complex of underlying exclusivist Hindu nationalist philosophy. This case study of Karnataka Prevention of Slaughter and Protection of Cattle Bill 2010, which is considered a direct attack on the dietary practices of the minorities, is an extension of the critiques of religious-environmentalism and showcases the machinations of a fundamentalist metanarrative that obscures environmental thought. This silent form of communalism tends to go unnoticed when couched in scientific or politically correct language.
Vol. 46, No. 8 (FEBRUARY 19-25, 2011)||commentary||People vs Nuclear Power in Jaitapur, Maharashtra||PRAFUL BIDWAI||In the Konkan, thousands of families in the environmentally-rich and verdant Jaitapur area are waging a non-violent battle against the Department of Atomic Energy's plan to construct the world's biggest nuclear power complex in the region. A report of the struggle that has been met with repression and a critique of the proposed European Pressurised Reactors which are currently not operational anywhere in the world and have been criticised for their design flaws.
Vol. 46, No. 7 (FEBRUARY 12-18, 2011)||commentary||CRZ Notification 2011: Not the End of the Road||CHANDRIKA SHARMA||The Coastal Regulation Zone Notification 2011 fails to meet the demands of the fishing community and environmentalist groups that it should offer greater protection to the coastal ecosystem, recognise the inalienable right of fisherfolk to their habitats and provide them with representation in decision-making. However, the prior consultations on the notification have led to a higher level of awareness about coastal issues among the fishing communities, government officials and the general public, all auguring well for its enforcement.
Vol. 46, No. 7 (FEBRUARY 12-18, 2011)||special articles||Socio-economic Implications of Depleting Groundwater Resource in Punjab: A Comparative Analysis of Different Irrigation Systems||ANINDITA SARKAR||The consequences of negative groundwater draft have mostly been viewed as an ecological disaster, but the externalities of groundwater depletion pose greater concern for socio-economic equity in the access to this resource. This empirical analysis signifies the concerns for the livelihoods of farmers, when the cost of depletion is disproportionately borne by the resource-poor farmers as they are unable to invest in capital and technology and are hence denied the benefits of groundwater irrigation that is subsidised by free electricity. This situation is perpetuated with further scarcity leading to unequal economic returns and, finally, takes the most exploitative form where the "large landlords" also emerge as "water lords" through surplus accumulation, forcing the small and marginal landholders to become landless agricultural labourers.
Vol. 46, No. 3 (JANUARY 15-21, 2011)||perspectives||Managing Transformational Change: Principles from a Systems Perspective||KANCHAN CHOPRA||In the context of development and its impact on the environment, we need to understand "change", the kinds of change that systems can absorb, the "good" change and distinguish it from the "abrupt" change which systems cannot cope with. We also need to understand how to increase and sustain the capability of people, economies and nature to deal with change. And for this, science, policy and practice need to fashion modes of working together. They are themselves three components of a structure that can help us to move forward in a sustainable and dynamic manner. The argument here is that a systems approach using some notions from resilience theory will provide pointers towards how this can happen.
