29/4/1978- ||special articles||4366574||Utilisation of Groundwater Resource||Using a simple regression model, this paper investigates the influence of rainfall and rural electrification programme on the rate of utilisation of groundwater potential. It is found that an increase in village electrification by one percentage point may result, on the average, in an increase of half to two-thirds of a percentage point in the rate of utilisation of groundwater potential. The impact is likely to be greater if rural electrification is undertaken in low rainfall and semi-arid areas, because the rate of utilisation and rainfall are negatively related with each other. For investment in rural electrification in high rainfall areas to have the maximum impact, it is necessary to simultaneously strengthen agricultural extension services, long and short-term credit institutions, land consolidation work and other land reform measures.||Nazim A. Kazmi
25/3/1978- ||review of agriculture, march 1978||4366463||Water Supply as an Instrument of Agricultural Policy: A Case Study||In the early years of irrigation projects, when water is abundant, farmers in the upper reaches adopt crops and irrigation techniques which use water extravagantly. As the canal network is extended and the available water has to be spread over a larger area the head reach farmers mount resistance to reduction of their water supply. This paper describes the administrative effort that was needed to prevent paddy being raised in irrigated dry blocks and on land which was not entitled to irrigation at all on the Tungabhadra High Level Canal in southern Andhra Pradesh. Case studies such as this may help to get a clearer idea of the potential for using control over irrigation water as a policy instrument for inducing desired changes in cropping pattern.||Robert Wade
1/2/1978- ||structural deformations||4366351||Structural Retrogression in the Indian Economy since the Mid-Sixties||The performance of the Indian economy since the mid-sixties has been very unsatisfactory. Growth of national income during this period has been slower and there have been sharp year-to-year fluctuations. Agriculture has made the major contribution to growth, while the performance of organised industry has been most disappointing. The services sector, particularly 'banking and insurance' and 'public administration and defence', has experienced faster growth than the commodity producing sectors. In agriculture, while the sources of growth have changed over time, the overall rate of growth has failed to get accelerated because the impact of the new agricultural strategy has been restricted to a few crops and to a few regions and even this impact has begun to get exhausted. Production of pulses and coarse grains have suffered the most. Inter-regional and inter-class disparities in rural income and asset distribution have got vastly accentuated. In industry, the basic and capital goods sectors have suffered and, more importantly, the production of mass consumption goods has lagged behind. The growth of non-farm employment has been most tardy. This, together with a higher rate of inflation, reduced per capita availability of wage goods and widening inequality of incomes and assets, makes it almost certain that the proportion of people below the 'poverty line' has risen instead of declining. The primary cause of this structural retrogression of the Indian economy is the decline of planning. Saving and investment efforts, particularly in the public sector, were curtailed, public sector Plan outlays were initially slashed and thereafter their growth has been drastically curtailed, funds for the maintenance of past Plan projects have not been allocated adequately, resource mobilisation efforts have been both inadequate and inequitous, deficit financing has been resorted to discriminately and, finally, a significant proportion of public sector outlays has been frittered away in non-development expenditure in the form of subsidies and transfers to state governments for such purposes as drought relief, clearance of overdrafts, etc. The poor performance of the public sector has had its effects on private sector output, employment and investment. Private sector investment, though it has not done badly, has been mainly financed by public financial institutions. But despite enormous amounts of public funds being made available to the private sector, there has hardly been any worthwhile impact on the investment climate or on growth of employment. This has happened because the funds have been expanded on more capital-intensive projects and also siphoned off by the promoters of projects by inflating project costs and engineering cost overruns, activities which have been encouraged by the relaxation of government controls, by the general atmosphere of financial indiscipline in the government and private sectors and by the liberal availability of public funds at low cost.||S. L. Shetty
25/11/1978- ||review of management, november 1978||4367127||Training for Public Enterprise Managers: Relevance of Organisation Development||One can understand why team-building, as an important strategy for bringing about change in the organisational process, is more acceptable to American organisations. It is also effective in the Japanese situation, as the popularity of the quality control circles movement indicates. In the Indian context, concern for organisational stability may generate forces of resistance to environmentally desirable change. Development of a collective strategy for organisational change could be facilitated, provided the strategy does not clash with the predominant values. We still do not possess adequate insight into the predominant cultural characteristics of the administrative-managerial groups in Third World countries like India. The situation is still somewhat blurred and there is rapidity of change. Secondly, we still do not have a clear picture of how managerial values get socialised in an organisation system and to what extent technology influences the values of the managers. Having admitted these limitations and gaps in our knowledge, we can still make the proposition that cultural relativity reflected in managerial values would be an important parameter in the organisational change process - particularly in determining the training needs of managers to become change agents in revitalising organisations.||Nitish R. De
