1/8/1977- ||political economy of energy policy||4365858||Technological Alternatives and the Indian Energy Crisis||In a country like India where income inequalities are also reflected as inequalities of per capita energy consumption, the new energy crisis mainly threatens the consumption-oriented lifestyle of an energy-affluent elite and has far less impact on the rural poor. These, condemned to survive on 'zero' private cost non-commercial energy, have been in the grip of a grave energy crisis from a period long before the 'new' energy crisis began. The energy-calamity that has overtaken the elite provides an excellent opportunity to review the whole Indian energy situation and seek alternatives compatible with the resource constraints, which would result in a more equitable pattern of energy consumption. This paper traces the origins of the recent energy crisis and presents a detailed diagnosis. Apart from detailed suggestions regarding the conservation of oil as well as more intensive use of coal, hydel power and non-commercial energy sources, the study specifically examines the possibilities and limitations of three main alternative energy sources: solar energy, bio-gas and wind energy. There is also a brief discussion of possible improvements in the utilisation of human and animal energies. Some specific and detailed suggestions regarding the distribution of available energy among the urban and rural population are made. It is calculated that an increase by 4.4 times of the total commercial and non-commercial energy production in 1971 in India will ensure the entire Indian population a reasonable energy consumption. This increase must be reached by a strategy of discriminatory and biased increases, so that the energy consumption of the deprived and affluent sections is increased by factors of 5 and 2.5 respectively. Such increases require a mix of decentralised and centralised energy production, the former being more relevant to the rural areas. The study concludes that the energy crisis of the affluent is not a people's problem and the real energy crisis experienced by the poor can be tackled with alternative approaches.||Amulya Kumar N. Reddy,K. Krishna Prasad
2/7/1977- ||special articles||41497079||Rural Employment, Wages and Labour Markets in India: A Survey of Research — II||This survey, of empirical work on the rural labour market is divided into three sections. Section I surveys the literature on size, characteristics and composition of the rural working force and employment, particularly the changes over time. Changes in the composition of rural work participation and in the distribution of employment, viewed together with the pattern of migration, would indicate at the macro level, adjustments of labour supply to changing income-earning opportunities. Section II covers studies on labour demand implications of agricultural growth with technological change, focusing on the respective employment effects of the seed-water-fertiliser innovation and of the tractor technology depending on the composition of its operational uses. With an eye to the labour demand effects of the changes in scale of production, technology, and related changes in the nature of tenancy and other agrarian institutions, the author discusses studies on employment and wage rates for agricultural labourers, on changes in labours share of value added, and on the board correlates of regional and/or intertemporal variation in wage rates. Section III is concerned more exclusively with the relatively /small amount of literature relating to the process of rural wage determination, the allocation of household labour supply and. of demand for farm labour by the source of supply. The issue of seasonality is discussed more directly in this context. The various implications of institutional differences in the modes of wage payment, labour contracts, and the nature of land (lease) markets are also considered in some details there. This paper is being published in three parts. Section I appeared in the Review of Agriculture last week and Section III will be published next week.||Kalpana Bardhan
16/7/1977- ||special article||4365774||Maharashtra's Employment Guarantee Scheme: A Programme to Emulate?||In a country as large, poor and populous as India a scheme like Maharashtra's Employment Guarantee Scheme (EGS) is of great interest. After examining the administrative and finance mechanisms of the working of the EGS in Maharashtra, the paper argues that the EGS is a response to the conditions obtaining in the Maharashtra countryside, themselves a result of the state's history. The broad socio-economic aspects of the EGS are then examined and the shift of emphasis from village to watershed level is seen as a step in the right direction. With the co-operation of other rural development agencies and in a proper developmental framework a national EGS is seen as feasible.||Norman Reynolds,Pushpa Sundar
1/8/1977- ||political economy of energy policy||4365857||Energy Policy for Rural India||Technically and financially it is not difficult to meet the basic needs of the poor for food, domestic water and fuel, clothing, sanitation and health. That expenditure on meeting these needs is socially productive is obvious, but it can even be economically productive in the narrow sense of the term. A need-based approach to rural development can help generate the resources for the relatively large investments required for the widespread development of irrigation and fuel supply. Meeting needs today can be made consonant with investment for the future. This paper is a preliminary analysis of the energy needs of rural India in the light of basic human needs.||Arjun Makhijani
25/6/1977- ||review of agriculture, june 1977||4365721||Rural Employment, Wages and Labour Markets in India: A Survey of Research||This survey of empirical work on the rural labour market is divided into three sections. Section I surveys the literature on size, characteristics and composition of the rural working force and employment, particularly the changes over time. Changes in the composition of rural work participation and in the distribution of employment, viewed together with the pattern of migration, would indicate at the macro level, adjustments of labour supply to changing income-earning opportunities. Section II covers studies on labour demand implications of agricultural growth with technological change, focusing on the respective employment effects of the seed-water-fertiliser innovation and of the tractor technology depending on the composition of its operational uses. With an eye to the labour demand effects of the changes in scale of production, technology, and related changes in the nature of tenancy and other agrarian institutions, the author discusses studies on employment and wage rates for agricultural labourers, on changes in labour's share of valued added, and on the broad correlates of regional and/or intertemporal variation in wage rates. Section III is concerned more exclusively with the relatively small amount of literature relating to the process of rural wage determination, the allocation of household labour supply and of demand for farm labour by the source of supply. The issue of seasonality is discussed more directly in this context. The various implications of institutional differences in the modes of wage payment, labour contracts, and the nature of land (lease) markets are also considered in some details there. This paper will be published in three parts. Section I appears below; Section II and III will be published in the following weeks.||Kalpana Bardhan
03/12/1977- ||special articles||4366155||Opportunity to Face Basic Issues||The real ills of the present educational system are its elitist nature, its heavy pushout and dropout rate, its scandalously poor rural school environment, its growing unemployed and unemployable product outcome, its indifference to the 70 per cent adult illiterates and neglect of the special claims of first generation learners, its minimal learning and atrocious evaluation system, and its widening gap between the overt (prescribed) curriculum and the hidden (real) curriculum. Compared to these basic ills, which the new system provides an opportunity of bringing out into the open with the possibility of remedial action, the technical problems of how the 10-year school should be staged, where the +2 higher secondary stage should be placed and what kind of mix of general and vocational learning should be planned are of secondary significance. If the basic issues are dealt with, the technical problems can also be solved.||Malcolm S. Adiseshiah
26/3/1977- ||review of agriculture, march 1977||4365435||India's Groundwater Resources||Surprisingly, firm estimates of groundwater potential of India are lacking at present. In appraising groundwater resources, it is imperative that a clear distinction be made between stock and flow dimension. From the stock viewpoint, groundwater is probably an immense resource in India. But, judged from the flow angle, it is a bountiful resource only in the eastern Gangetic plains. Prudence requires utilisation of groundwater resource at a long-run annual rate of no more than annual accretion to groundwater stock. Excess withdrawal is permissible only in areas prone to waterlogging.||B. D. Dhawan
09/7/1977- ||special articles||4365752||Rural Employment, Wages and Labour Markets in India: A Survey of Research: III||This survey of empirical work on the rural labour market is divided into three sections. Section I surveys the literature on size, characteristics and composition of the rural working force and employment, particularly the changes over time. Changes in the composition of rural work participation and in the distribution of employment, viewed together with the pattern of migration, would indicate at the macro level, adjustments of labour supply to changing income-earning opportunities. Section II covers studies on labour demand implications of agricultural growth with technological change, focusing on the respective employment effects of the seed-water-fertiliser innovation and of the tractor technology depending on the composition of its operational uses. With an to the labour demand effects of the changes in scale of production, technology, and related changes in the nature of tenancy and other agrarian institutions, the author discusses studies on employment and wage rates for agricultural labourers, on changes in labour's share of value added, and on the board correlates of regional and/or intertemporal variation in wage rates. Section III is concerned more exclusively with the relatively small amount of literature relating to the process of rural wage determination, the allocation of household labour supply and of demand for farm labour by the source of supply. The issue of seasonality is discussed more directly in this context. The various implications of institutional differences in the modes of wage payment, labour contracts, and the nature of land (lease) markets are also considered in some details there. This is the concluding installment of this paper which has been published in three parts. Section I appeared in the Review of Agriculture, June 25, and Section II was published last week.||Kalpana Bardhan
1/2/1977- ||the economic crisis||4365323||Economic Performance since the Third Plan and Its Implications for Policy||The publication of the slim volume of the final Fifth Five-Year Plan nearly three years after the beginning of the Fifth Plan Period provides an opportunity to review the performance of the economy since Independence. In many ways the period since 1965-66, the last year of the Third Five-Year Plan, marks a watershed. It is argued that the decade 1966-1975 represents a well marked departure from the trends established during the first three plans - particularly in respect of public sector investment both in the aggregate and in crucial sectors such as transportation and communication. To a significant extent the considerably below average economic performance in the past decade could be attributed to this failure of the public sector. There is some evidence that the cutback and stagnation in public sector investment has been associated with a considerable decline in net foreign aid. It is suggested that unless the opportunity offered by the present happy position with regard to inventories of foodgrains and foreign exchange is exploited to push up public investment, long-term growth prospects of the economy may be seriously affected. Thus, a return to serious planning that was interrupted in 1966 is called for. It is hoped that the sixth plan would indeed be a plan unlike its two immediate predecessors.||T. N. Srinivasan,N. S. S. Narayana
