02/6/1984-09/6/1984||special articles||4373303||Narmada Valley Project: Development or Destruction?||This report is based on the findings of a team of university students which covered the entire length of the Narmada, largely on foot, in July and August 1983 with a view to studying the likely environmental impact of the massive hydel and irrigation complex and documenting the existing natural and cultural facets of the river. The team's conclusions are at two levels. At one level, there are various problems in the planning and implementation of the project, most of which can be eliminated (at least theoretically) by proper 'management'. But at another level, the question arises whether the project as a whole (even if successfully implemented) and the broad policy behind it, are really 'development' in the true sense of the word or whether they may not lead to a chain of environmentally destructive consequences which could negate all the short-term gains made by the project. The environmental, socio-cultural and economic sanity of the project is clearly questionable.||Ashish Kothari,Rajiv Bhartari
31/3/1984- ||special articles||4373112||Purse Seine Fishing in Kerala: Its Economics and Politics||Traditional fishermen in Kerala find in the purse seine net a potential threat to their livelihood as it sweeps all waters traditionally considered to be their preserve and leaves no fish to be caught by them or for breeding. The purse seine operators (mostly non-fishermen), on the other hand, consider it a highly productive field for investment, despite all the attendant risks. The fish merchants have welcomed purse seine fishing as it assures them of a large quantity of fish for selling at considerable profit in the interior markets. Ice manufacturers too are enthusiastic about the new development as it offers a large market for their product. The objective of this article is to highlight the need for a judicious exploitation of the marine fishery resources of Kerala by utilising the new technology without adversely affecting the interests of the traditional fishermen. The Kerala Marine Fishing Regulation Act has got provisions for this. What is needed is their vigorous implementation.||Ramakrishnan Korakandy
28/1/1984- ||review of political economy, january 1984||4372888||Growth and Technical Change in Indian Cotton-Mill Industry||After a period of relatively good performance in the fifties and early sixties, the textile industry entered a phase of 'crisis' in the mid-sixties characterised by a deceleration in the growth of output and investment and closure of a number of firms afflicted by 'sickness'. In the literature dealing with this 'crisis', three aspects have received substantial attention. These are (i) the deceleration in the growth of demand for the products of the industry; (ii) the technical backwardness of the industry reflected in the persistence of backward and outdated techniques, including machinery that has long crossed its normal life span, and (iii) the uneven incidence of both the decline in demand and the backwardness of technique across firms in the industry, resulting in the coexistence of firms with widely varying levels of productivity and technical advance on the one hand, and wide variations in financial performance on the other. This paper is concerned with delineating those aspects of the structure of markets and nature of technology in the textile industry, which, in the given environment, necessitate the emergence of the above trends.||C. P. Chandrasekhar
13/10/1984- ||special articles||4373670||Women and People's Ecological Movement: A Case Study of Women's Role in the Chipko Movement in Uttar Pradesh||In the Chipko Movement, which is concerned with preservation of forests and maintenance of the ecological balance in the sub-Himalayan region, is a social movement, an important role has been played by women of Garhwal region. The author contends that women's participation not only played often a decisive role, but that considering the specific existential conditions in the hill region it was easier for women to perceive the need for preserving the ecological balance in the area. However, the mobilisation of women for the cause of preserving forests has brought about a situation of conflict regarding their own status in society-demand for sharing in the decision-making process-and men's opposition to this and to women's support for Chipko movement. The study is based on investigation in Chamoli district in Garhwal division.||Shobhita Jain
31/3/1984- ||special articles||4373111||Dilemmas of Energy Strategies in India: Implications for Third World||All of us, more so in the Third World societies, need to ensure an orderly, energy transition. The two-pronged strategy to be adopted for this purpose will consist of: (i) Reducing rapidly our dependence on fossil-fuel energy sources and (ii) turning increasingly to technologies that blossom from renewable sources of energy. Policy-makers and experts, e g, in India, seem to see the validity of the strategy. But numerous ailemmas have in practice obliged Third World countries like India to set themselves in the opposite direction, so that the dependence on fossil-fuel, energies, far from being reduced, is destined to increase uninterruptedly at least up to the year 2000 AD. The Paper brings to surface underlying compulsions in several areas such as industrialisation, electricity, rural energy and energy conservation, and in relation to some economic, social, defence-oriented and political factors. These show the immense practical difficulties being faced in bringing short-term economic policy measures in line with the correct perception of long-term energy strategies. The Paper draws on Indian conditions and experiences and concludes with a few comments on international elements of energy strategies and suggestions for short-term implementation.||D. R. Pendse
25/2/1984- ||review of management, february 1984||4372984||Changes in Organisational Climate and Management Education, 1968 to 1981: Some Warning Signals||The diffusion and adoption of advanced technologies in business and industry are critical to development. The rapid growth of the number of institutions offering both degree and non-degree programmes in management has been one response to this critical need. Research on the role of these programmes in the diffusion of innovative technologies has revealed that (i) the 'climate' of employing organisations and (ii) specific characteristics of such training programmes affect greatly the rate or extent to which trained managers introduce improved methods in their job settings. Studies carried out in 1968 and 1981 to evaluate the impact of such management education institutions provide data on change over time in these specific factors. The findings show that, while advanced management methods are more widely practised in business and industry, the climate in organisations is less supportive of innovation than before. Findings also show that certain important characteristics of the educational programmes in three select management education institutions are less conducive to innovative effort than in 1968. The implications of these findings are explored in this paper.||Howard J. Baumgartel,Rukhsana Pathan,Badal Roy,Gopal Khandelwal,Anisur Rahman
