1/2/1967- ||focus on development||4357570||Water Management: A Neglected Aspect of Indian Agriculture||No programme of agricultural development by way of modernisation or use of new high-yielding seeds or large inputs of fertilisers can succeed without adequate supply of water and without proper water management for agricultural purposes. This must be accompanied by an appropriate ayacut development programme which is properly the responsibility of the agricultural department in the States. To get the maximum contribution from irrigation to agricultural production, we need co-ordination between the Irrigation, Rural Electrification, Co-operation and Agricultural Departments. We also need the co-operation of industry for producing supplies of agricultural inputs and of the district administration for co-ordinated action at the local levels. The agricultural scientist has also to be involved in the whole process not only for extension work, but also for evaluation, guidance and research, oriented to the needs of the climate, crops and cultivating practices of the region. Above all ways and means must be found to make the cultivator a partner and participant in both major and minor irrigation. All these are complicated problems and they need detailed study and solution on the national, State and local levels. The author, therefore, suggests the appointment of an irrigation commission that will deal with both major and minor irrigation works, review progress, evaluate performance, identify gaps and mistakes and suggest concrete policies and detailed programmes for full and scientific utilisation of the country's water resources with the accent on water management by the cultivator for the maximisation of agricultural production. Such a commission should essentially be manned by agricultural scientists and progressive agriculturists rather than merely by engineers and irrigation experts.||V. K. R. Rao
1/2/1967- ||focus on development||4357569||Weakest Link in Fertiliser Programme||It is pointless to talk of the fertiliser problem since the problems which face the three types of fertilisers nitrogen, phosphorous and potash-are distinct and have to be discussed separately. Too much attention has been focussed on nitrogenous fertilisers whereas the real problem facing us is the shortage of sulphur which threatens to hamstring the production of phosphorous. For, if fertilisers are to have the maximum impact on agricultural yields, they have to be administered in a complex, granular, water-soluble form incorporating nitrogen, phosphorous and potash. So even if we establish the planned capacity for nitrogen, the fertiliser programme will fail unless we give urgent thought to reducing our dependence on imported sulphur. The most practical way of doing this would be to turn to the production of phosphoric acid from rock phosphate by the electro-thermal process. This is a well-known process and is in use in many countries. Why then, have we not thought of trying it in India?||A. Gupta
