25/10/1969- ||special articles||40738047||Coal Industry in Pre-Plan Period: Trend of Profits and Investment||In the first four decades of this century, till the outbreak of World War II, ruthless competition, struggle for survival and the top priority given to immediate profits removed from the minds of coal-mine owners any consideration for conservation of coal resources and any hesitation about producing and selling superior quality coal when the market would accept inferior grades. The different bases on which managing agents' remuneration was fixed all placed a high premium on maximum output, large scale and immediate profit. As a result, while collieries never languished for want of finance for immediate profit-making, there was little investment in modernisation and rationalisation. This tale of greed and short-sightedness was repeated during the War and immediate post-War years which were a period of high prices and profits for the coal industry.||A B Ghosh
8/11/1969- ||special articles||40738091||On Learning to Live with the Second Best||No one in India confidently believes in the likelihood of effective land reforms in any but a few exceptional States. Rather than be paralysed by wistful looking back to the idealism of earlier years , it would be better to seek an alternative solution. This solution lies in promoting the process of collective bargaining in agriculture: of labourers' unions with capitalist employers, of tenant unions with landlords, and of water-users' unions with the owners of expensive tube-wells or others with monopoly access to irrigation water. True, the divisive structure of villages and the absolute level of poverty would, perhaps, justify a degree of pessimism about the prospects of this solution. It might, nevertheless, be possible for legislation at the State level to do something to alter the balance of power in the villages. Action on these lines in pre-War Japan did attain a degree of success. Dispute over this solution would in any event, be more relevant to the realities of the present situation than plans for land reform.||R P Dore
27/12/1969- ||review of agriculture: december 1969||40838798||Productivity and Allocation of Resources between Rice and Jute in West Bengal||This paper seeks to (i) examine the functional relationship between inputs of fertiliser, water, labour and plant protection devices and crop output; (ii) estimate the marginal products of each of these inputs in aman rice and jute in West Bengal; (iii) examine the elasticities of production with respect to different inputs and the returns to scale that prevail in production of these two crops; (iv) find out the optimum combination of the variable farm resources within aman rice and jute as well as between the two crops in order to maximise the total gross farm returns from these crops.||C C Maji
19/4/1969- ||special articles||40739554||Drought and Scarcity in the Rajasthan Desert: Some Basic Issues||No development strategy for arid lands can prove effective unless conservation measures are an integral part of it. Unfortunately conservation has received hardly any attention in both relief works and development plans. Nor have steps been taken to prevent over-grazing and wrong use of land. [The author is grateful to V S Vyas and M D Desai for their valuable comments.]||N S Jodha
29/3/1969- ||review of agriculture, march 1969||40739493||From Protective to Productive Irrigation||Several factors determine the production obtained from a high-yielding variety. In fact, cultivation of these varieties requires an entirely new agronomic technology. The difference between local and high-yielding varieties is not so much in their water requirement as in the technique of water management. The fact is that though in the absence of a balanced use of fertiliser, irrigation does not give very different results as between local and high-yielding varieties, controlled irrigation with balanced fertiliser application gives the full potential of high-yielding varieties, many times higher than that of local varieties. The new concept of irrigation is that irrigation is for the climate and the soil and not for the crop. Much saving of water and many times higher yields can be obtained by controlled and timely irrigations. Water management for the high-yielding varieties has transformed irrigation from being protective to being productive in orientation, and thus, from being extensive to being intensive in character.||J S Kanwar
22/11/1969- ||special articles||40738115||Impact of Kosi Embankment: A Study of Two Villages in North Bihar||The Kosi project has two major objectives : construction of embankments on the east and west banks of the river to check floods and, second, to make possible use of excess waters for irrigation. The immediate impact of the project has been the protection of 6 lakh acres in Darbhanga and Saharsa districts against floods. This has led to tremendous changes in the economy of the erstwhile flood affected villages. This study analyses changes in economic conditions in two villages in Darbhanga district since the construction of the embankment.||N K Jaiswal,U K Vyas
29/3/1969- ||review of agriculture, march 1969||40739494||New Concepts in Irrigation: Necessary Changes for New Strategy||With the introduction of the high-yielding varieties, water management in crop cultivation has assumed a new dimension. It is not merely that timely and adequate supply of water is required, but that a conceptual change has to be accepted regarding the factors determining the water needs of plants. While formerly the "transpiration ratio", related to the leaf area, morphological characters, and the root system of plants was considered crucial, today the "evapo-transpiration' by crop plants is considered in decisions regarding water administration. The new concept encompasses water loss governed primarily by meteorological parameters and is even independent of crop species as long as the vegetation is extensive and in an active growth stage. Evaporimetry, the technique of individually measuring climatological elements governing water loss and water needs, can thus be an aid in regulating water management practices. Water supply has, therefore, to be based on needs indicated by the weather in a particular area. In the light of recent advances, present canal practices appear very unsatisfactory. In many irrigation projects, the amount of water released for a given command area is constant from January to June even though the weather gets far drier and warmer. It has also been found that more frequent irrigations give better results than fewer but more prolonged irrigations. This entails certain changes in canal designs and in the rotation systems.||N G Dastane
27/12/1969- ||review of agriculture: december 1969||40838803||Labour and the Green Revolution: The Experience in Punjab||Mechanisation of agriculture elicits sharp reactions where employment is a major problem. Its costbenefit for any region has therefore to be carefully considered. The following paper examines some implications of the different degrees of mechanisation in the wheat-growing areas of Punjab. It is based on a study of a 10-acre well-water irrigated farm with a typical cropping pattern and using traditional technology. It is concluded that, while the far higher yields of HYV technology require greater man-days to handle the higher yields, the introduction of pumpsets, tractors, threshers and reapers would reduce the mandays required. Though the change in technology displaces labour, the loss is considerably offset by the additional labour required by the increase in cropping and the change in cropping pattern. Marked changes are likely, nevertheless, in the peak labour demand and in the composition of the labour force engaged in agricultural operations.||Martin H Billings,Arjan Singh
29/3/1969- ||review of agriculture, march 1969||40739492||From Unsteady Infancy to Vigorous Adolescence Rice Development||A review of the experience with the HYVP thrust for greater rice production strongly suggests that in spite of some drawbacks, farmers have responded well to the production opportunities opened up by the new dwarf plant types. The two varieties on which the HYVP was built initially do have characteristics which slowed their diffusion, but the rapid spread of TN-I and IR 8 in just two seasons indicates clearly that the rice farmer is willing and anxious to innovate — all he needs is an assured supply of inputs capable of underpinning a profitable transformation of his agriculture. The disadvantages inherent in TN-1 and IR 8 have been already largely overcome by research. The demand from cultivators now is for new varieties of high yield potential without the defects of the earlier dwarfs; it is not for old varieties with an improved yield capability tacked on. Scientists will be turning their attention shortly to the needs of upland rice farmers, to developing photo period sensitive varieties for areas where drainage and water control are restricted, to work on deepwater rice varieties, etc.||W David Hopper,Wayne H Freeman
27/9/1969- ||special articles||40736128||India's Sacred Cattle and Cultural Ecology||An important contribution to the debate on India's sacred cattle is Marvin Harris's article "The Cultural Ecology of India's Sacred Cattle" (Current Anthropology, Vol VII, No a, 1966). Harris contends that "the irrational, non-economic and exotic aspects of the Indian cattle complex are greatly overemphasised at the expense of rationed economic and mundane interpretations" and urges that "explanation of taboos, customs and rituals associated with the management of Indian cattle be sought in the 'positive-functioned' and 'adaptive' processes of the ecological system of which they are a part rather than in the influence of Hindu theology". This article, however, argues that in Marvin Harris's thesis is summarised the entire defence of Hindu cow-worship garbed in pseudo-science. It is suggested here that a cattle population smaller in number but better fed than at present will make a better contribution in milk, traction and dung to human survival and well-being in India. Even if, because of prevailing technology and institutional arrangements in agriculture, it is not possible to reduce the number of draught animals, the large number of cows is wholly unjustified. A smaller number of better-fed cows will contribute more milk and dung and will give enough calves to replace the needed stock of drought animals.||V M Dandekar
27/12/1969- ||review of agriculture: december 1969||40838799||Agricultural Development in Maharashtra: Some Aspects||There is a marked relationship between agricultural incomes and availability of water in the Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra. Ahmednagar being a dry area, the farmer has to depend on irrigation for assured water supply on which his ability to take to improved technology depends. In securing such regular water supply, the larger and richer farmers are better placed for two reasons. First, they have greater influence on the loan-giving agencies who in turn deem larger farmers more creditworthy. Secondly, they are financially better placed to take the risk of digging a well without certain knowledge as to the availability or depth of the water table. The net result is that, especially with the influx of the new HYV technology, the hiatus between the rich and the poor farmers has widened. There are two ways out of this. One is for the official loan-giving agencies to consciously encourage small farmers to get and use loans for investment in irrigation, and the other is to remove the uncertainties that follow from geo-physical ignorance of the area, its water resources and its crop potential. [This study has been sponsored and financed by the Nuffield College Project on Developing Countries.]||Deepak Lal
1/7/1969- ||dynamics of social change||40739866||The Asian Drama: An Indian View||The subtitle, 'An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations', to Myrdal's book, "The Asian Drama", draws deliberate attention to the sharp contrast between the new era in Europe which confronted Adam Smith when in 1776 he wrote "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations", and the dark future in South Asia today. Myrdal in fact had a dual motivation in writing this book : first, an involvement in human problems, and secondly, a scientific interest in the reasons for the lack of development in South Asia. While Myrdal's original interest seems to have been to compile factual information and focus on conditions in this part of the world, he was gradually obliged, through his attempt to identify the causes of stagnation, to construct a theory of development. Hence his 'institutional' theory of development. Myrdal believes that, unless the whole of society and its institutions, in the countries of this region, receive a significant 'push', development may be difficult to attain. Here Myrdal finds himself in deep waters for, despite his attempt to suggest remedial measures to remove the obstacles to development, he feels too uncertain either to predict the course of events in the future for this region or to foresee definite economic progress in it. Also, while he pins his hopes on "the big push" he fails to convincingly portray what the content of that big push could be. Steeped as he is in the concepts of the West, Myrdal cannot help evaluating the history and events of South Asia within the framework of those concepts. He thus fails to see certain critical relationships. While he touches on the role of science and technology in economic development, he fails to follow through its particular flavour and many ramifications for the underdeveloped countries. For instance, the particular weakness of statistical data collected in India could be surmounted by the survey method as developed and used in India. Yet this practice is not thoroughly followed precisely because the tradition of science is weak in Indian society's hierarchical complex. [The author of this article claims to give an intensely personal view of the "The Asian Drama", that the choice of topics is highly selective and subjective and made almost at random because there is so much to choose from. The views expressed here are not those of any of the organisations with which the author was or is still associated.]||P C Mahalanobis
28/6/1969- ||review of agriculture, june 1969||40739792||A Strategy for Ayacut Development under Major Irrigation Projects||Perhaps in no other agricultural or industrial programme is the gestation lag so long as it is in major irrigation projects. The long gap between the creation and utilisation of irrigation facilities depresses returns on investment in these projects and prevents full exploitation of the additional agricultural production potential. Not only that, the reservoirs get silted as a result of non-utilisation of their waters and their life is permanently reduced. Considering that our resources of water for irrigation are limited, we have to plan for the optimum use of available water by getting the maximum yield per acre in the shortest span of time. Fortunately, modern developments in agricultural technology make this desirable goal a practical one. The advent of the new high-yielding varieties has reduced the requirement of water per crop, primarily because of the shorter duration of these varieties. Combined with the technique of relay-cropping, it is now possible to raise two irrigated crops if there is supply of water to the ayacut for a period of six to seven months. Double-cropping in the past required a continuous flow of water for anything from eight to eleven months. As a result, through suitable choice of crops, it is possible to reconcile to a great extent the objective of protective irrigation — providing insurance against drought and total crop failure to the largest possible area — and that of productive irrigation — maximising agricultural production. This, however, presupposes sound ayacut development under the major irrigation projects covering not merely the agricultural aspects such as soils, crops and water management, but also the broader economic and social aspects which impinge on speedy and full use of the irrigation potential. This article discusses a comprehensive strategy for ayacut development. The application of the strategy is illustrated with reference to the Tungabhadra project and, more briefly, the Upper Krishna project.||Jayakumar Anagol
