13/4/1985- ||special articles||4374280||On Some Aspects of the Strategy of Growth in India||This paper identifies four major components of the strategy of growth that is taking shape in India under the new regime: (a) district-wise industrialisation; (b) modernisation and technological advancement that is prone to the Ricardo effect; (c) recourse to import as a device for instilling a competitive spirit; and (d) regeneration and optimal use of land resources. It argues the case for a State Public Sector to initiate small and medium scale industries. It suggests the criterion of 'forward-biased labour-intensity' to counter the Ricardo effect. It pleads for removal of barriers to the growth of small-scale entrepreneurs. Some 60 million hectares of land, equivalent to one-fifth of the total territory, or two-fifths of the net cropped area, is under pastures, culturable waste, fallow, and the like. Bulk of this land can be developed, within the limits of available technology, into farms or forests. Part of it may be mobilised to settle landless labourers. This paper gives a simple computable criterion for land allocation, under conditions of external economies of forests or similar ecological factors.||Ranjit Sau
08/6/1985- ||special articles||4374495||Superpowers in Collusion||Mankind has acquired the dubious ability to destroy itself over and over again only recently and cannot possibly live with it for long. For even if we altogether ignore what are commonly described as 'conventional' weapons and even if we forget all about the biological and chemical arsenals being expanded at present, the explosive power already congealed in the nuclear 'warheads' alone is sufficient to blow up the biosphere of the Earth many times over. What we need to, can and must try to comprehend is the essential logic of this situation. The intensification of the process of weaponisation means that each superpower establishment, using the other's programmes and pursuits as an excuse, extracts ever larger resources out of its own people. But at the same time, the two powers will be, and in fact will have no option but to be, seeking new modes of accommodation with each other. By the very nature of the weapons they have managed to acquire the two have been forced to enter into a state of a fateful and a potentially fatal collusion. Each is concerned with its own build-up as determined by the perceived domestic requirements of its own Establishment. In the circumstances, the contradiction must get crystallised. and also find expression, not between the blocs but within each bloc.||Narindar Singh
14/12/1985- ||special articles||4375119||Poverty and Agricultural Development||The author's analysis of data on agricultural development and the proportion of the rural population below the poverty line suggests that the adoption of the water-fertiliser-HYV technology has led to a decline in poverty. The decline is also associated with increase in agricultural and foodgrains production. If the decline in the proportion of the poor in rural India has been relatively small, it is not because the 'trickle down modified' thesis is not valid in the Indian situation, but because the rate of agricultural growth has been low and has been heavily dependent on the vagaries of nature. Against this background, the author argues that land reform in the sense of 'land to the tiller' is the one measure that is needed for an enduring solution of the problem of rural poverty. Land reform is needed to break the power of the rural oligarchy and initiate the process of rapid agricultural and rural development. The other solution lies in providing water management, fertiliser, HYV seed, credit and extension service in a big way, free from bureaucratic red-tape, for rapid agricultural development. On the other hand, the 'target group oriented schemes' approach to poverty alleviation, which is essentially an euphemism for charity and distribution of doles, furthers the imperialist attempt to increase the stranglehold of bureaucratic and semi-feudal structures on the Indian economy and to erode the resources needed for accumulation and development of technology. This approach also suits the rural oligarchy and bureaucracy.||Pradhan H. Prasad
30/3/1985- ||review of agriculture, march 1985||4374222||Impact of Irrigation on Farmers' Acreage Response to Price: Case of Andhra Pradesh||Availability of irrigation makes the agricultural production process more flexible to human decision-making and choices by weakening the constraints of lack of water for the cultivation of crops. Thus farmers in the irrigated areas are likely to be more responsive to an economic incentive than their counterparts in the unirrigated areas in terms of crop pattern shifts and in their endeavours to raise yield per hectare. This paper attempts to examine the impact of irrigation on farmers' acreage response behaviour to changes in output prices. District-wise data from Andhra Pradesh are used for the period 1955-56 to 1972-73.||Hrushikesh Panda
21/12/1985-28/12/1985||review of agriculture, december 1985||4375144||Pattern of Commercial Farming in Guntur District||In recent debates on the changes in Indian agriculture, commercial farming occupies an important place. Guntur district of Andhra Pradesh is regarded as one of the leading areas in regard to commercialisation of agriculture. The district is well known for tobacco and chillies. After the advent of the Nagarjuna Sagar waters in 1968-69, it has gained a distinct place in the country's cotton map on account of its significant contribution to the production of import-substituting superior long and extra-long staple cottons like MCU-5, Varalaxmi and Suvin. The cultivation of these varieties of cotton requires substantial monetary outlays as well as careful application of techniques like crop rotation, preparatory tillage, etc, for better yields. During the period 1970-71 to 1979-80, there has been a four-fold increase in the average value per hectare from the cotton crop in Guntur district. Against this background, this study focuses on (i) agricultural changes in Guntur district from the beginning of this century, (ii) factors responsible for the shift of cropping pattern towards cotton as against other commercial crops as well as foodgrain crops, (iii) profitability of cotton cultivation across different socio-economic classes, and, (iv) the marketing channels for cotton and seasonality in prices of cotton.||V. N. Reddy
08/6/1985- ||special articles||4374494||Mortality Toll of Cities: Emerging Patterns of Disease in Bombay||Concern with the environmental conditions of disease control has until recently focused on water and food-borne diseases, for the diarrhoeal diseases have been major killers, especially of young children, both in rural and urban areas. Without disputing this approach, this article seeks to redress the balance of concern, and to caution against a too generalised interpretation of emerging trends. For in some of the large and growing cities at least, the mortality pendulum seems to be swinging away from intestinal towards respiratory diseases; however, the causes of this change are not as clear-cut as the current interest in air pollution might suggest.||Radhika Ramasubban,Nigel Crook
1/11/1985- ||natural resource utilisation and the agrarian economy||4375013||Irrigation: Traditional vs Modern||Its unique rainfall pattern distinguishes monsoon Asia from the rest of the world. Unlike other parts, agriculture could develop here only as specially adapted varieties suited to the characteristic natural condition. Besides, the beginning of agriculture date back to several millenia. The water-management techniques therefore, had the opportunity to be perfected over time. Unfamiliar with the natural conditions and adaptation process different from their own, the Western world could make only halting progress in understanding these traditional techniques. At every stage however, the limited wisdom was pampered as the 'modern' and scientific; the more complex traditional aspects regarded as unscientific and backward. The result is that even now the merits of these traditional systems await discovery and recognition towards enrichment of modern natural resource management techniques. But the political and cultural domination is anything but congenial to such scientific progress.||Nirmal Sengupta
30/3/1985- ||review of agriculture, march 1985||4374221||Technical and Institutional Factors in Utilisation of Irrigation: A Case Study of Public Canals in Punjab||This paper argues that technical causes apart, the factors inhibiting fuller utilisation of irrigation potential have their roots in the social organisation and management of the use of irrigation waters. The author tries to establish this with reference to canal irrigation, on the basis primarily of fieldwork in the canal irrigated villages of Punjab. The author begins with a brief description of the technique of canal irrigation, highlighting the technical requirements for its optimal functioning and the limitations of the quality of irrigation it is possible to supply with canals. Section II discusses the pattern of utilisation of canals with a view to identifying associated problems. The author tries to show that there exist different modes of utilising the same technical source for different economic categories of cultivators. This has important implications in terms of the operational efficiency and the cost of irrigation faced by the respective groups, and this, in turn affects their production decisions and ultimate output. In Section III is presented a discussion of the implications of different modes of irrigation in terms of cost and efficiency. Finally, in the concluding Section, the author points to the poor efficiency of canal irrigation as currently practised and focuses on the social origin of some of the problems hindering the realisation of the irrigation potential that has been technically created. Also highlighted is the scale bias implicit in the economic adversities following this underutilisation; that is, the smaller farmers tend to suffer proportionately higher losses.||Jasveen Jairath
1/11/1985- ||natural resource utilisation and the agrarian economy||4375016||Renewable Energy Development Alternatives: Village Experiences and Indicators for Policy||Notwithstanding the intensified research on the development of environmentally sound energy technologies for rural areas, it has been observed that many programmes have had a limited impact on the energy situation, especially with respect to the rural poor. While the constraints to successful implementation may in some instances be technical ones, in many other cases they are social in nature. Indeed, the knowledge about energy related technology greatly exceeds knowledge about the problems such technology is meant to solve. The present article is based on 18 months of participatory action research in a village of eastern Uttar Pradesh. It analyses the energy needs of the villagers in relation to their problems and priorities, and presents the experiences of the introduction of several technologies. It is shown that the process of adoption of different technologies has a direct connection with the social and economic condition of the villagers, that determines their needs and constraints and hence the nature and level of their participation. Consideration of factors like poverty, household time budgeting, resource access and social organisation is seen to provide important perspectives for refining renewable energy development strategies in villages.||Varun Vidyarthi
1/11/1985- ||natural resource utilisation and the agrarian economy||4375018||The Goat: An Appropriate Animal for Arid and Semi-Arid Regions||Land use in the Indian arid zone has been both thoughtless and unscientific. The forces of desertification have gathered momentum within this zone. If this trend is to be reversed a suitable system of mixed farming with emphasis on animal husbandry has to be evolved and practised. In evolving such a programme the choice of appropriate livestock becomes crucial. Where feed is scarce and of low nutritive value larger animals are at a disadvantage because of their greater maintenance requirements. Smaller animals like the goat with lower maintenance needs can cover large areas to gather sufficient nutrients for survival and for minimum production of meat and milk. There are two conflicting views about the goat's role in land use. One view holds that the goat is the major cause of rangeland destruction and soil erosion, and its propogation should be checked. But a contradictory opinion is that the goat is after all a major supplier of animal protein and that since it usually consumes the scrub left-over from the overgrazing by cattle and sheep, it is unrealistic to blame the goat for environmental destruction. The authors, who subscribe to the latter view, discuss why it is ecologically necessary to assign the goat its rightful place in plans for arid and semi-arid regions.||K. A. Shankarnarayan,H. C. Bohra,P. K. Ghosh
30/3/1985- ||special articles||4374227||Marxist Ideas in Development Economics: A Brief Evaluation||In development economics, as in much of social sciences in general, the most valuable contribution of the Marxist approach is the sense of history with which it is imbued, its focus on the tension between property relations and productive potential in a given social formation, and on the importance of collective action and power in enhancing or thwarting processes of institutional change to resolve that tension, its insistence on bringing to the forefront of public policy debates an analysis of the nature of the state and the constellation of power groupings in civil society, and, of course, its abiding commitment to certain normative ideas on questions of exploitation and injustice. Its processes of reasoning, however, leave much to be desired, with its frequent substitution of convenient teleology for explanatory mechanisms and of a kind of murky institutionalism for rigorous rationale of contractual arrangements, and its failure to base aggregative results firmly on consistent actions of economic agents at the micro-level, ignoring as a consequence incentive compatibility problems, issues of contract enforcement and repetitive transactions, strategic interaction of agents (even with commonality of class interests), the free rider problem in class formation and action, and the disequilibrium dynamics of adjustment paths. Some versions of the Marxist approach also claim too much in the generality of its laws of motion of history, overlooking important historical specificities and localised contexts of culture, geography and demography not always reflecting the technological base. In development planning literature, it also brings a certain legacy of single-minded pursuit of accumulation (along with an autarchic zeal), often slighting acute problems of present consumption, incentives, adjustments, managerial and administrative capacities, ecological balance, and ways of expanding human capabilities beyond improvements on the technological frontier.||Pranab Bardhan
1/11/1985- ||natural resource utilisation and the agrarian economy||4375015||Scientific Forestry and Social Change in Uttarakhand||This paper, a study of the development of forestry science in the hill districts of Uttar Pradesh collectively known as Uttarakhand, addresses itself to three sets of issues; (1) the utilisation of forests in the indigenous social system; (ii) the specific forms of state intervention, and the interpretation of scientific techniques in terms of traditional patterns of resource use; and (iii) the social changes that were a consequence of scientific forestry. In contradistinction to other studies, this paper focuses on the content of colonial forestry science, with a view to understanding its social and cultural underpinnings. It is argued that the structure of forestry science was predicated on its "other"-viz the cultural and social meaning traditionally ascribed to the forests in different parts of India. Having disrupted existing forms of resource utilisation, scientific forestry had to contend with recurrent and widespread protest. This led to the evolution of sophisticated techniques, described in this paper, that could meet the often conflicting aims of commercial timber production and the preemption of peasant protest. Not surprisingly, this lead to a major dislocation in agrarian relations in Uttarakhand.||Ramachandra Guha
1/11/1985- ||foreign technology suppliers' view of indian industry||4375032||India's Technology Policy and Its Influence on Technology Imports and Technology Development||This study brings out the relatively minor influence of government policies on the technology imports and technology development activities of Indian firms. While a minority of the firms either find the policies to be too restrictive or, on the other hand, have benefited from them in their bargaining for a better price, a majority have remained largely unaffected by them. Further, while these policies have been successful in regulating certain quantitative aspects of technology imports (payments, duration, etc), their success in promoting technological development activities within Indian industry has been limited. Technological activities of Indian firms, it is argued here, are far more sensitive to government policies pertaining to the nature of the market and the industrial structure than to those which are explicitly aimed at promoting technology development. The latter policies can be successful only if an industrial environment conducive to innovative activity is simultaneously created. On the other hand, modifications in technology policy alone (such as a liberal payment policy, greater R and D incentives, etc) without necessary changes in industrial policy will fail to infuse technological dynamism into Indian industry.||Ghayur Alam
1/11/1985- ||natural resource utilisation and the agrarian economy||4375012||Towards an Ecological History of India||Human societies are strongly dependent on their resource base. Changes in this base, in technologies and social modes of resource-use and the conflicts which arise over access to resources are important elements of human history. Each of the wave of human populations which colonised India beginning more than a hundred years ago brought with them their own brand of technology and social mode of resource use. The resultant population itself evolved new technologies and modes of resource use. It is possible that many of the taboos, the rules and regulations of a society incorporate the 'ecological wisdom' of the particular civilisation. A rereading of the social history of the subcontinent affords valuable insights into its ecological history as well. For instance, the ecological prudence of the settled pre-Aryan settlements probably came into disastrous conflict with the lack of such understanding among the nomadic Aryan tribes. At least part of the appeal of early Buddhism may have been partly rooted in its taboo on animal sacrifices in a period when the economically necessary animals were already dwindling. It is suggested here that the emergence of caste may have been the response to the saturation of capacity of the land to support human populations at the prevalent level of technology and the strong competition for the resources of the land.||Madhav Gadgil
10/8/1985- ||special articles||4374695||Rational Approach towards Fuelwood Crisis in Rural India||A majority of India's rural population still uses firewood for cooking purposes. With vanishing forests, there is a shortage of firewood. An integrated programme for fuelwood production to meet the total requirement of the country is an imperative need. But the implementation of such a programme would pose serious problems. It would be more useful to begin with projects covering specific locations like a village or a block, aiming at making them self-sufficient in fuelwood. The experience gained thereby could help in formulating an overall long-term strategy. This paper discusses the experience of some specific projects in Gujarat state.||V. J. Patel
