25/3/1972- ||review of agriculture, march 1972||4361169||A Strategy for Dry Land Agriculture||In the wake of the green revolution, the regional disparities in the farm sector threaten to get accentuated. The factor endowments of the regions vary vastly and so also their capacity to take advantage of the new technology which has ushered in the green revolution. The dry areas, in particular, stand automatically neglected under the country's new strategy with its bias for areas with assured water. Even in the past (i e, prior to the HYV programme) the dry areas suffered relative neglect because the agricultural production programmes, basically evolved for well watered areas, almost completely disregarded the problems and potential of the dry areas. Consequently, while agriculture in other areas developed fast, its performance in the dry areas showed gradual decline. The present paper illustrates the above situation with respect to the arid region of Rajasthan which covers nearly three-fifths of the state. After examining the growth retarding implications of the present approach, it argues that a meaningful development strategy for the dry areas can be evolved only in the context of the limitations and potentialities of the dry lands. A tentative approach has been suggested which emphasises production activities in which dry lands have a comparative advantage vis-a-vis other areas. [The author is grateful to M D Desai and D S Tyagi for their valuable suggestions while preparing this paper.]||N. S. Jodha
26/2/1972- ||review of management, february 1972||4361071||Concept of Planning: A Case Study||In this paper we cite a case study of "planning" at the Ahmedabad Branch of the Praja Bank. The study underlines how creative aspects of the planning process can suffer if planning is reduced to a mechanistic target-setting and budgeting exercise with or without formal use of environmental data. It is widely recognised that long range planning is the responsibility of top management. This is because the key notes of long range planning are creativity and judgment. It is maintained, therefore, that the role of formal analysis in long range planning is at best marginal. The intangible ingredients-creativity and judgment-do not lend themselves to any formal analysis. We entirely agree with the first assertion. But we have reservations in accepting the second proposition. We maintain, on the contrary, that a use of formal analytical framework is helpful in a judicious exercise of judgment and in pinpointing areas of creative thinking. The case study of Praja Bank supports this statement.||V. L. Mote,B. G. Shah
24/6/1972- ||review of management, june 1972||4361513||Small Farmer and Long-Term Finance||Small farmers form a sizeable proportion of rural households. Yet studies on the green revolution have shown that it has been limited to the few who have the resources or the access to institutional finance. The problem of credit to small farmers is mostly a problem of short-term finance in irrigated-areas while it is more a problem of long-term finance in the dry-areas where the needed infrastructure has not been made available through public investments. Even in areas newly brought under irrigation through public investments, small farmers need long-term finance for levelling, bunding, terracing, soil conservation, etc. Most Committees, with the exception of the Rural Credit Review Committee of 1969, however, concentrated their attention upon short-term and medium-term credit and neglected the issue of long-term finance especially in relation to the small farmer. Against this background, an attempt is made in this paper to evaluate the scanty published data on long-term finance in relation to the small farmers. The analysis is mainly limited to the advances of land development banks for 1969-70. Available data are examined to seek answers to the following questions. (1) What is the percentage of small farmer-households that borrowed from land development banks vis-a-vis others? (2) What is the proportion of small farmers to the total borrowers from land development banks? (3) Is there any relationship between the area owned by small farmers and the advances made to them? (4) What is the relative share of small farmers in the total advances? [The authors are grateful to B Prasada Rao for his valuable suggestions.]||R. M. Mohana Rao,P. Jagannadha Acharlu
18/3/1972- ||special articles||4361150||Perspective for Economic Development of Bangladesh||The objective of this paper is to examine the possibility of Bangladesh achieving self-sustained growth for its economy, and its likely relations with the Indian economy in this context. It is only natural that Bangladesh, emerging from its subservience to the economy of West Pakistan, will seek to develop its own economy on an independent basis. Not being endowed with a variety of natural resources adequate for its needs, Bangladesh will have to depend on a skilful development of its foreign trade to make up for this fact. In this respect, the situation of Bangladesh compares with that of Japan. However, Bangladesh's proximity to India may be advantageous to it. It can be shown that the objective of viability of Bangladesh's economy could be pursued with benefit to both countries.||Deb Kumar Bose,Anil Chatterjee
30/12/1972- ||special article||4362197||Mexican Economic Growth, 1940-45: Some Lessons||The pre-conditions for fast economic growth had already been laid when the Second World War suddenly changed the economic climate for Mexico. There was unused capacity, a strong economic and financial infrastructure and a growing agricultural surplus. The War years provided external stimuli to which the Mexican economy responded by realigning its structure for long-term growth. During this period, Mexico's gross domestic product grew at the unprecedented rate of 8.2 per cent per year. This rate of growth was achieved in conditions of a relatively low investment level and a frugal capital-output ratio. Although investment was not the driving force behind the fast rate of growth, it was located in key sectors like roads and railways and in mechinery and equipment. By 1945 the major problems of Mexican development could be perceived. These persist to date. They include the inability of this impressive rate of growth to improve the lot of the rural proletariat and urban unorganised labour and a propensity to make the rich richer. The government is unable to raise enough revenues from taxes and is therefore excessively dependent on monetary policy and inflation for promoting investment. The public sector remains subordinate to the private sector. Most of these problems converge on the structural defects of dualism which the import substituting model has led to.||Gurcharan Das
04/3/1972- ||special articles||4361104||Emerging Power Pattern in the Persian Gulf||Iran's recent occupation of three islands in the Gulf, Saudi Arabia's ambiguity about the occupation and Kuwait's lack of official reaction-despite the protests and denunciations of the shaikhdom of Ras al-Khaima and Iraq-are a reflection of the emerging power pattern. Western interests and the national interests of the two local major conservative powers-Iran and Saudi Arabia-coincide in the Gulf. The two inter-connected basic concerns of the West, and of Iran and Saudi Arabia, are to maintain the flow of oil and to retain the conservative-feudal political systems prevalent in the area. In doing this, a 'division of work' has been agreed upon between Iran and Saudi Arabia. Iran, with its strong navy and air force, is expected to guard the waters and coasts of the Gulf and not let any 'revolutionary' movements develop in the shaikhdoms, nor allow infiltration from the south or the north. Saudi Arabia's role, with its increasing military power, political prestige and oil money, is to see that the 'revolutionary' movements on the fringe of the Arabian peninsula are reversed or localised. Kuwait is the third linchpin helping to maintain the status quo in the vulnerable Gulf shaikhdoms.||M. A. Saleem Khan
26/8/1972- ||review of management, august 1972||4361729||External Conditions in Corporate Planning: Scanning, Analysis and Forecasting||This paper offers the following approach to the development of the environmental scanning, analysis and forecasting aspect of the corporate planning function: First, the concepts of 'relevance', 'systems' and 'theory of the business' are discussed. The operational consequences of these concepts are then described. Finally, the major kinds of information to be scanned are listed and the approaches used to analyse and forecast these major external forces are described.||Philip Thomas
