31/5/1975- ||review of management, may 1975||4537153||Dependence in Indian Culture: From Mud Huts to Company Board Rooms||Managers, as well as other members of the Indian elite like trade union leaders, teachers, journalists, and politicians, have to recognise the nature of the problem of dependence in Indian culture, and decide upon and implement actions to change the nature of this culture. Introduction both of systematic arrangements for personal growth at the individual level to free the creative potential in every person and of organisation development at the level of industry, trade union, government, and every important organised sector of the country by using advanced knowledge and technology available to the behavioural sciences, to make India a nation which is far more adaptive and flexible in its response to the changing nature of the environment, are necessary to transform the present degenerate society. The individuals need to be freed from their scrips and new values have to be brought into Indian society and nation to make them dynamic and viable entities.||Gouranga P. Chattopadhyay
21/6/1975-28/6/1975||special articles||4537218||Elections to Delhi Metropolitan Council: An Analysis of Electoral and Ecological Variables||Electoral activity takes place in a social milieu. Hence a number of diverse factors influence voting decisions. One way to study voting patterns is to relate electoral returns to a maximum number of structural variables which define the political unit. Attitudinal approaches can supplement, but not supplant, such study. For this study, the Metropolitan Council constituencies of the Union Territory of Delhi were chosen as units of observations. The data were drawn from the 1972 election returns, brought out by the Press Information Bureau of the Government of India. The socio-economic data were based on the 1961 Census of India. All the data were subjected to orthogonal factor analysis. The article concludes that the Congress (R) support cuts across ecological frontiers, and that it gets consistent support from the female voters as also from literate voters. But the Jan Sangh gets more support from among the literate sections. Nothing very definite can be said, however, about the vote share of Communists, Socialists, or the Left ideological group, as their scanty presence in Delhi's elections renders any analysis not so meaningful. Lastly, the Right ideological group, as a whole, is a function of the sex factor and the economic factor and some contribution is made to it also by the electoral factor.||Raj Chandidas
27/12/1975- ||review of agriculture, december 1975||40738468||Tubewell Irrigation Analysis of Some Technical Alternatives||The objectives of this paper are : (i) To consider a set of technical alternatives with respect to size of well, method of drilling, type of pump, screen material, and sourde of energy for lifting water through shallow tubewells in India; and (ii) To provide a framework for a preliminary analysis of these alternatives under different economic and technical assumptions. We have divided the paper into four sections. Section I provides the background information on the development of minor irrigation in India in the last two'decades. This enables us to present, in the next section, a set technical alternatives which can be considered for utilising groundwater. Section III gives the methodology used in evaluating these options, while Section IV presents some results. Appendix A gives a comprehensive analysis of the various components of capital costs and operating costs along with the data sources.||Ramesh Bhatia,Meera Mehta
10/5/1975- ||special articles||4537103||Tackling the Edible Oil Famine||A shortage of edible and fatty oils of near-famine proportions is upon us. Availability of edible oil in 1972-73 was at an all-time low of 2.3 kg annually per head. This is well below even the normal consumption demand, and barely a fifth of the quantity required for adequate nutrition. A sudden increase in world prices since 1972 has made edible oil imports even less feasible. Increase in output of oilseeds in the last two decades has been much less through higher productivity than through area increase, to which there is a limit. An active plan to meet oil shortages is presented in this paper. It envisages a larger allocation for research in oilseeds, particularly for extension activities, which are the main lecunae at present. Seed multiplication and distribution systems in particular require special attention if oilseed availability is to increase. Creation was proposed of a National Oilseeds Development Council or Board as an apex planning body, as well as of a separate research organisation or national grid of advanced research centres devoted to oilseed crops. Groundnut dominates the Indian output of oils, and is a major factor in low total oil production. Being a cross-pollinated crop, genetic manipulation is limited. For this and other reasons, diversification of oil crops is called for. Groundnut itself could best b raised as a summer irrigated crop. Of the many other oilseed candidates, sunflower, safflower and castor have high potential. New areas in eastern India can be sown to them. In traditional areas, crop rotation systems must include oilseeds, for which purpose a variety of traditional and new crops are available. Technology can add to the oil pool. Examples are the processing of cottonseed for its oil, the collection, stabilisation and extraction of oil from rice bran, and the collection, refining and utilisation of oils from forest and roadside trees. Specific steps are required in each of these areas. India produces several high-priced oils in surplus, like linseed and castor, which are in world demand. A barter system could enable import of low-priced oils needed in India, like tallow and palm oil, by export of a smaller quantity of these surplus oils, without any foreign exchange changing hands. Highvalue oilseed products could also be traded similarly for oils. Certain other measures will also stimulate oil production: ban on the use of whole cottonseed as cattlefeed, provision of credit to farmers for agricultural inputs, and grant of advances to entrepreneurs to organise collection of oilseeds from forest trees.||K. T. Achaya
21/6/1975-28/6/1975||review of agriculture, june 1975||4537214||Economics of Groundwater Utilisation: Traditional versus Modern Techniques||Given the skewed distribution of land ownership and the small size of the average farm the adverse externalities of tubewell technology cannot be completely avoided in a free enterprise framework, even if the state legislatures pass legislation to control and regulate the use of groundwater. The externalities can, however, be internalised if a public agency undertakes to supply groundwater. Public tubewells, wherever feasible, are not only the best means for managing groundwater resources efficiently, but are also the only way to overcome the problem of lack of utilisation of groundwater resources in certain areas afflicted by fragmented, tenanted, small holdings.||B. D. Dhawan
22/11/1975- ||special articles||40738370||Fall in Mortality Rates in Kerala: An Explanatory Hypothesis||The development of public health measures ontributed more to the early fall in mortality rates in Kerala than the extension of the medicai care delivery system. Death rates in the Travancore-Cochin area of Kerala had begun to fall from a much earlier period than elsewhere in India. A significant proportion of this fall in death rates was due to reduction in mortality from infectious diseases like plague, cholera and smallpox. The decline in mortality from these infectious diseases may be traced to the various public health measures such as eradication and control of communicable diseases, sanitation, water supply, personal and environmental hygiene, etc, rather than to the extension of the medical care delivery system. The experience of other countries conforms to this hypothesis.||P G K Panikar
1/11/1975- ||special articles||40738333||Role of Small-Scale Industries in Economic Development: Irrigation Pumpsets Industry in Coimbatore||Industries supplying basic ivpms to agriculture play a key role in the strategy of economic development in India, Adequate supply of water is one of the main inputs required for agricultural development, and the use of power-driven pumps for irrigation is a powerful factor of progress in agriculture, especially in Tamil Nadu. A striking feature of the pump industry is the large number of small-scale enterpises, in and around Coimbatore, manufacturing centrifugal pumps and eleztnc motors, ana accounting for a large share of the production of the entire country. A study of this small-scale industry is of great interest as this se tor contributes to both the industrial and the agricultural development of India. This study is divided into three parts : (1) Grçwth of the small-scale piimps industry in Coimbatore; present importance and economic structure of this sector. (2) Marketing of the pumps produced by the industry and demand for pumps. (3) Use of power-driven pumps in agriculture with special reference to Tamil Nadu and the impact on agriculture.||Michel Cartillier
1/8/1975- ||agrarian modes||4537335||Inter-Regional Disparities in per Capita Production and Productivity of Foodgrains: A Preliminary Note on Trends||The 'new agricultural strategy', with its emphasis on use of modern inputs in areas of assured water supply, has a built-in bias towards the promotion of inequality both between and within the different regions of the country. This article is concerned with disparities, not only in productivity but also in per capita production. Wherever possible, the district is treated as the unit of analysis, no further disaggregation being possible for want of data. While making no attempt to identify all the factors which contribute to regional variations in productivity, we shall attempt to isolate the impact of irrigation and cropping pattern, which are particularly important in the context of the spatial effects of the new technology.||N. Krishnaji
31/5/1975- ||special articles||4537158||Social Behaviour of Students: A Women's College in Mysore City||This study of some colleges in Mysore city seeks to (i) provide a brief sketch of the factors underlying the formation of 'cliques' among students - so as to throw light on the forces leading to fission and fusion among students - and the 'cliques' role in the lives of students; (ii) provide some idea of the college social environment and the circumstances in which the students defy authority and try to exercise their will; and (iii) examine the nature of the commitment among students to their studies and the factors that contribute to or hinder that commitment.||Chitra Sivakumar
29/3/1975- ||special articles||4536993||Farakka Project: Calcutta Port's Fate in the Balance||The Farakka Barrage was completed nearly five years ago. The feeder canal is ready for commissioning; just cutting a crossbar will enable Farakka waters to flow into the Hooghly via the Bhagirathi to rejuvenate Calcutta port and revitalise Calcutta's water supply. But political difficulties bar the fructification of the project. On February 15, 1974, the then External Affairs Minister, Sardar Swaran Singh, agreed with the Bangladesh Minister for Flood Control, Khondkar Mushtaque Ahmed, that the barrage would not be operated till a "mutually acceptable solution" was arrived at. Earlier, in July 1973; Khondkar Ahmed had remarked in the Bangladesh Parliament that the Farakka barrage was "a real problem" for his country. The statement was unfortunate because it echoed the sentiment expressed by Pakistan in 1969 during the Indo-Pak discussions on the subject. That the Padma and other Bangladesh rivers must not be allowed to degenerate is not questioned. At the same time, must the Calcutta port be allowed to die without headwaters supply from the Ganga, especially when over Rs 140 crores have already been spent by several agencies for this purpose? The Ganga-Padma complex has to be viewed as one integrated system, particularly because India and Bangladesh profess to be two friendly nations.||Tushar Ranjan Patranabis
